This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the Great
War of the Ring and included many glimpses of the yet more ancient history
that preceded it. It was begun soon after The Hobbit was written and before
its publication in 1937; but I did not go on with this sequel, for I wished
first to complete and set in order the mythology and legends of the Elder
Days, which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do this
for my own satisfaction, and I had little hope that other people would be
interested in this work, especially since it was primarily linguistic in
inspiration and was begun in order to provide the necessary background of
'history' for Elvish tongues.

When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to
no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged by requests from readers for
more information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story was
drawn irresistibly towards the older world, and became an account, as it
were, of its end and passing away before its beginning and middle had been
told. The process had begun in the writing of The Hobbit, in which there
were already some references to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the
High-elves, and the ores, as well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of
things higher or deeper or darker than its surface: Durin, Moria, Gandalf,
the Necromancer, the Ring. The discovery of the significance of these
glimpses and of their relation to the ancient histories revealed the Third
Age and its culmination in the War of the Ring.

Those who had asked for more information about hobbits eventually got
it, but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of The Lord of the
Rings went on at intervals during the years 1936 to 1949, a period in which
I had many duties that I did not neglect, and many other interests as a
learner and teacher that often absorbed me. The delay was, of course, also
increased by the outbreak of war in 1939, by the end of which year the tale
had not yet reached the end of Book One. In spite of the darkness of the
next five years I found that the story could not now be wholly abandoned,
and I plodded on, mostly by night, till I stood by Balin's tomb in Moria.
There I halted for a long while. It was almost a year later when I went on
and so came to Lothlurien and the Great River late in 1941. In the next year




I wrote the first drafts of the matter that now stands as Book Three, and
the beginnings of chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as the beacons
flared in Anurien and Thjoden came to Harrowdale I stopped. Foresight had
failed and there was no time for thought.

It was during 1944 that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of a
war which it was my task to conduct, or at least to report, 1 forced myself
to tackle the journey of Frodo to Mordor. These chapters, eventually to
become Book Four, were written and sent out as a serial to my son,
Christopher, then in South Africa with the RAF. Nonetheless it took another
five years before the tale was brought to its present end; in that time I
changed my house, my chair, and my college, and the days though less dark
were no less laborious. Then when the ’end’ had at last been reached the
whole story had to be revised, and indeed largely re-written backwards. And
it had to be typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by
the ten-fingered was beyond my means.

The Lord of the Rings has been read by many people since it finally
appeared in print; and I should like to say something here with reference to
the many opinions or guesses that I have received or have read concerning
the motives and meaning of the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a
tale-teller to try his hand at a really long story that would hold the
attention of readers, amuse them, delight them, and at times maybe excite
them or deeply move them. As a guide I had only my own feelings for what is
appealing or moving, and for many the guide was inevitably often at fault.
Some who have read the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have found it
boring, absurd, or contemptible; and I have no cause to complain, since I
have similar opinions of their works, or of the kinds of writing that they
evidently prefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed
my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible in a
long tale to please everybody at all points, nor to displease everybody at
the same points; for I find from the letters that I have received that the
passages or chapters that are to some a blemish are all by others specially
approved. The most critical reader of all, myself, now finds many defects,
minor and major, but being fortunately under no obligation either to review
the book or to write it again, he will pass over these in silence, except
one that has been noted by others: the book is too short.

As for any inner meaning or 'message', it has in the intention of the
author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. As the story grew it put




down roots (into the past) and threw out unexpected branches: but its main
theme was settled from the outset by the inevitable choice of the Ring as
the link between it and The Hobbit. The crucial chapter, "The Shadow of the
Past', is one of the oldest parts of the tale. It was written long before
the foreshadow of 1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and
from that point the story would have developed along essentially the same
lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before
in mind, or in some cases already written, and little or nothing in it was
modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels.

The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its
conclusion. If it had inspired or directed the development of the legend,
then certainly the Ring would have been seized and used against Sauron; he
would not have been annihilated but enslaved, and Barad-dyr would not have
been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring,
would m the confusion and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the
missing links in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would
have made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge the self-styled
Ruler of Middle-earth. In that conflict both sides would have held hobbits
in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves.

Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastes or views of
those who like allegory or topical reference. But I cordially dislike
allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old
and wary enough to detect its presence. I much prefer history, true or
feigned, with its varied applicability to the thought and experience of
readers. I think that many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but the
one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the other in the purposed
domination of the author.

An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experience,
but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely
complex, and attempts to define the process are at best guesses from
evidence that is inadequate and ambiguous. It is also false, though
naturally attractive, when the lives of an author and critic have
overlapped, to suppose that the movements of thought or the events of times
common to both were necessarily the most powerful influences. One has
indeed

personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but
as the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to be caught in youth




by 1914 was no less hideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and
the following years. By 1918 all but one of my close friends were dead. Or
to take a less grievous matter: it has been supposed by some that The
Scouring of the Shire’ reflects the situation in England at the time when I
was finishing my tale. It does not. It is an essential part of the plot,
foreseen from the outset, though in the event modified by the character of
Saruman as developed in the story without, need I say, any allegorical
significance or contemporary political reference whatsoever. It has indeed
some basis in experience, though slender (for the economic situation was
entirely different), and much further back. The country in which I lived in
childhood was being shabbily destroyed before I was ten, in days when
motor-cars were rare objects (I had never seen one) and men were still
building suburban railways. Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the last
decrepitude of the once thriving corn-mill beside its pool that long ago
seemed to me so important. I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but
his father, the Old miller, had a black beard, and he was not named
Sandy man.

The Lord of the Rings is now issued in a new edition, and the
opportunity has been taken of revising it. A number of errors and
inconsistencies that still remained in the text have been corrected, and an
attempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentive
readers have raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, and
if some seem to have been passed over that may be because I have failed to
keep my notes in order; but many enquiries could only be answered by
additional appendices, or indeed by the production of an accessory volume
containing much of the material that I did not include in the original
edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime
this edition offers this Foreword, an addition to the Prologue, some notes,
and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in intention
complete in items but not in references, since for the present purpose it
has been necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of
the material prepared for me by Mrs. N. Smith, belongs rather to the
accessory volume.




* PROLOGUE *



1. Concerning Hobbits



This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its pages a
reader may discover much of their character and a little of their history.
Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of
Westmarch that has already been published, under the title of The Hobbit.
That story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed
by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at large,
and called by him There and Back Again, since they told of his journey into
the East and his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits
in the great events of that Age that are here related.

Many, however, may wish to know more about this remarkable people
from

the outset, while some may not possess the earlier book. For such readers a
few notes on the more important points are here collected from Hobbit-lore,
and the first adventure is briefly recalled.

Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numerous
formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and good tilled
earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt.
They do not and did not understand or like machines more complicated than a
forge -bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though they were skilful with
tools. Even in ancient days they were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', as
they call us, and now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined
to be fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless nimble and
deft in their movements. They possessed from the first the art of
disappearing swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to
meet come blundering by; and this an they have developed until to Men it may
seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact, studied magic of any kind,
and their elusiveness is due solely to a professional skill that heredity
and practice, and a close friendship with the earth, have rendered




inimitable by bigger and clumsier races.

For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less tout and
stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much shorter. Their height
is variable, ranging between two and four feet of our measure. They seldom
now reach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they say, and in ancient days
they were taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took (Bullroarer),
son of Isengrim the Second, was four foot five and able to ride a horse. He
was surpassed in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of old;
but that curious matter is dealt with in this book.

As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are concerned,
in the days of their peace and prosperity they were a merry folk. They
dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green; but they
seldom wore shoes, since their feet had tough leathery soles and were clad
in a thick curling hair, much like the hair of their heads, which was
commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practised among them was
shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingers and could make many other
useful and comely things. Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather
than beautiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to
laughter, and to eating and drinking. And laugh they did, and eat, and
drink, often and heartily, being fond of simple jests at all times, and of
six meals a day (when they could get them). They were hospitable and
delighted in parties, and in presents, which they gave away freely and
eagerly accepted.

It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits are
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old
they spoke the languages of Men, after their own fashion, and liked and
disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship
is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in
the Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves still
preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom
and Hobbits are not mentioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in
fact, lived quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk
became even aware of them. And the world being after all full of strange
creatures beyond count, these little people seemed of very little
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly
became, by no wish of their own, both important and renowned, and troubled




the counsels of the Wise and the Great.

Those days, the Third Age of Middle -earth, are now long past, and the
shape of all lands has been changed; but the regions in which Hobbits then
lived were doubtless the same as those in which they still linger: the
North-West of the Old World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning (other
than genealogical lore) was far from general among them, but there remained
still a few in the older families who studied their own books, and even
gathered reports of old times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and
Men. Their own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and
their most ancient legends hardly looked further back than their Wandering
Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of
their peculiar words and customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time
when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of
Greenwood

the Great and the Misty Mountains. Why they later undertook the hard and
perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their
own accounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of a shadow
that fell on the forest, so that it became darkened and its new name was
Mirkwood.

Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had already become
divided into three somewhat different breeds: Harfoots, Stoors, and
Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner of skin, smaller, and shorter, and
they were beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble;
and they preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier
in build; their feet and hands were larger, and they preferred flat lands
and riversides. The Fallohides were fairer of skin and also of hair, and
they were taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of trees and
of woodlands.

The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and long
lived in the foothills of the mountains. They moved westward early, and
roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the others were still in the
Wilderland. They were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit,
and far the most numerous. They were the most inclined to settle in one
place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit of living in tunnels and
holes.




The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin, and
were less shy of Men. They came west after the Harfoots and followed the
course of the Loudwater southwards; and there many of them long dwelt
between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again.

The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were
more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in
language and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to
tilling. They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came down the
River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with the other kinds that had
preceded them, but being somewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were
often found as leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even
in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the
greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland.

In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains and the
Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a remnant
still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that came over the Sea
out of Westernesse; but they were dwindling fast and the lands of their
North Kingdom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room and to
spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began to settle in ordered
communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been
forgotten in Bilbo's time; but one of the first to become important still
endured, though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that
lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire.

It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their
letters and began to write after the manner of the D®nedain, who had in
their turn long before learned the art from the Elves. And in those days
also they forgot whatever languages they had used before, and spoke ever
after the Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was current
through all the lands of the kings from Arnor to Gondor, and about all the
coasts of the Sea from B elf alas to Lune. Yet they kept a few words of their
own, as well as their own names of months and days, and a great store of
personal names out of the past.

About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes history with a
reckoning of years. For it was in the one thousand six hundred and first
year of the Third Age that the Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set
out from Bree; and having obtained permission from the high king at
Fornostl, they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a great following of




Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been built in
the days of the power of the North Kingdom, and they took ail the land
beyond to dwell in, between the river and the Far Downs. All that was
demanded of them was that they should keep the Great Bridge in repair, and
all other bridges and roads, speed the king's messengers, and acknowledge
his lordship.

Thus began the Shire-reckoning, for the year of the crossing of the
Brandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) became Year One of the Shire,
and all later dates were reckoned from it. 2 At once the western Hobbits fell
in love with their new land, and they remained there, and soon passed once
more out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still a king
they were in name his subjects, but they were, in fact, ruled by their own
chieftains and meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To the
last battle at Fornost with the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen
to the aid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record
it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the Hobbits took the
land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the
authority of the king that was gone. There for a thousand years they were
little troubled by wars, and they prospered and multiplied after the Dark
Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of the Long Winter and the famine that
followed it. Many thousands then perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60)
were at the time of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become
accustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and though it had long
been deserted when they entered it, it had before been well tilled, and
there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods.

Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge,
and fifty from the northern moors to the marshes in the south. The Hobbits
named it the Shire, as the region of the authority of their Thain, and a
district of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant comer of the
world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded less
and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to think
that peace and plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all
sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the
Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible the long peace of
the Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased to remember
it.

At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they had never




fought among themselves. In olden days they had, of course, been often
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time
that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and
indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the
Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in
which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Ores. Even the weathers had
grown

milder, and the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in
bitter white winters were now only a grandfather's tale. So, though there
was still some store of weapons in the Shire, these were used mostly as
trophies, hanging above hearths or on walls, or gathered into the museum at
Michel Delving. The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits
had no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away, they called a
mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become rather crowded with mathoms,
and

many of the presents that passed from hand to hand were of that son.

Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough.

They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they were,
perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good things not least because they could,
when put to it, do without them, and could survive rough handling by grief,
foe, or weather in a way that astonished those who did not know them well
and looked no further than their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though
slow to quarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty
at bay, and at need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow,
for they were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows.
If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get quickly under cover,
as all trespassing beasts knew very well.

All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they
believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in the
course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually
in the Shire in Bilbo's days it was, as a rule, only the richest and the
poorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living
in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, with only one
window or none; while the well-to-do still constructed more luxurious
versions of the simple diggings of old. But suitable sites for these large
and ramifying tunnels (or smicils as they called them) were not everywhere to
be found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as they




multiplied, began to build above ground. Indeed, even in the hilly regions
and the older villages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the chief
township of the Shire, Michel Delving on the White Downs, there were now
many houses of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by
millers, smiths, ropers, and Cartwrights, and others of that sort; for even
when they had holes to live in. Hobbits had long been accustomed to build
sheds and workshops.

The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among
the inhabitants of the Marish down by the Brandywine. The Hobbits of that
quarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore
dwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were well known to be Stoors in a
large part of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on
their chins. No Harfoot or Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the
folk of the Marish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they
afterwards occupied, came for the most part later into the Shire up from
south-away; and they still had many peculiar names and strange words not
found elsewhere in the Shire.

It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside,
was derived from the D®nedain. But the Hobbits may have learned it direct
from the Elves, the teachers of Men in their youth. For the Elves of the
High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that
time at the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within reach
of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen on
the Tower Hills beyond the western marches. They shone far off in the
moonlight. The tallest was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound.
The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop
of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been known to climb it. Indeed, few
Hobbits had ever seen or sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever
returned to report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats
with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim. And as the days of
the Shire lengthened they spoke less and less with the Elves, and grew
afraid of them, and distrustful of those that had dealings with them; and
the Sea became a word of fear among them, and a token of death, and they
turned their faces away from the hills in the west.

The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits
used it in their own fashion. They did not go in for towers. Their houses
were usually long, low, and comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no




more than built imitations of smials, thatched with dry grass or straw, or
roofed with turves, and having walls somewhat bulged. That stage, however,
belonged to the early days of the Shire, and hobbit -building had long since
been altered, improved by devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by
themselves. A preference for round windows, and even round doors, was the
chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture.

The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large, and
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very
exceptional, as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or
the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives lived in
(comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many -tunnelled mansion.
All Hobbits were, in any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related
to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out
a family -tree that included even the more important members of the more
important families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book in
themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits
delighted in such things, if they were accurate: they liked to have books
filled with things that they already knew, set out fair and square with no
contradictions.




2. Concerning Pipe-weed



There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that must be
mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or inhaled, through pipes of
clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of a herb, which they called
pipe-weed or leaf, a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or 'art' as the Hobbits
preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about it in antiquity was
put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he
and the tobacco of the Southfarthing play a part in the history that
follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be
quoted.

’This,' he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be our
own invention. When Hobbits first began to smoke is not known, all the
legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire
smoked various herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that
Tobold Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew the true
pipe-weed in his gardens in the days of Isengrim the Second, about the year
1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district,
especially the varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and
Southern Star.

'How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day
he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is
said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went
further from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned
of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south
slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual
smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim, of course, to have done everything
before the people of the Shire, whom they refer to as "colonists"; but in
this case their claim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was
from Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread in the recent
centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers,
as still passed to and fro through that ancient road-meeting. The home and
centre of the an is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The Prancing




Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record.

'All the same, observations that I have made on my own many journeys
south have convinced me that the weed itself is not native to our parts of
the world, but came northward from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I
suspect, originally brought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows
abundantly in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in the North,
where it is never found wild, and flourishes only in warm sheltered places
like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only
for the fragrance of its flowers. From that land it must have been carried
up the Greenway during the long centuries between the coming of Elendil and
our own day. But even the D®nedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits
first put it into pipes. Not even the Wizards first thought of that before
we did. Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became
as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.'




3. Of the Ordering of the Shire



The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings already
referred to. North, South, East, and West; and these again each into a
number of folklands, which still bore the names of some of the old leading
families, although by the time of this history these names were no longer
found only in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in the
Tookland, but that was not true of many other families, such as the
Bagginses or the Boffins. Outside the Farthings were the East and West
Marches: the Buckland (see beginning of Chapter V, Book I); and the
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1462.

The Shire at this time had hardly any 'government'. Families for the
most part managed their own affairs. Growing food and eating it occupied
most of their time. In other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not
greedy, but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, workshops, and
small trades tended to remain unchanged for generations.

There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning the high
king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But
there had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and even the ruins of
Kings' Norbury were covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits still said of wild
folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king.

For they attributed to the king of old all their essential laws; and usually
they kept the laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said),
both ancient and just.

It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the
office of Thain had passed to them (from the Oldbucks) some centuries
before, and the chief Took had borne that title ever since. The Thain was
the master of the Shire-moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the
Hobbitry-in-arms, but as muster and moot were only held in times of
emergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship had ceased to be more
than a nominal dignity. The Took family was still, indeed, accorded a
special respect, for it remained both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and
was liable to produce in every generation strong characters of peculiar
habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter qualities, however, were




now rather tolerated (in the rich) than generally approved. The custom
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the family as The Took,
and of adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrim the
Second, for instance.

The only real official in the Shire at this date was the Mayor of
Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every seven years at the
Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe, that is at Midsummer. As mayor
almost his only duty was to preside at banquets, given on the
Shire-holidays, which occurred at frequent intervals. But the offices of
Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he
managed both the Messenger Service and the Watch. These were the only
Shire-services, and the Messengers were the most numerous, and much the
busier of the two. By no means all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were
wrote constantly to all their friends (and a selection of their relations)
who lived further off than an afternoon's walk.

The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their police, or
the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms
(such things being quite unknown), only a feather in their caps; and they
were in practice rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the
strayings of beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire only twelve
of them, three in each Farthing, for Inside Work. A rather larger body,
varying at need, was employed to 'beat the bounds’, and to see that
Outsiders of any kind, great or small, did not make themselves a nuisance.

At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were called,
had been greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of
strange persons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the
first sign that all was not quite as it should be, and always had been
except in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years had passed since
he set out on his memorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who
reached a hundred as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the
considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or how little he
revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still
kept secret the ring that he bad found.




4. Of the Finding of the Ring



As is told in The Hobbit , there came one day to Bilbo's door the great
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed,
than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions in
exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning
of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great
treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor
in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown
were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned
more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an 'accident'
by the way. The party was assailed by Ores in a high pass of the Misty
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was
lost for a while in the black ore-mines deep under the mountains, and there,
as he groped in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the
floor of a tunnel. Ele put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck.

Trying to find his way out. Bilbo went on down to the roots of the
mountains, until he could go no further. At the bottom of the tunnel lay a
cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the water lived
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his
large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching blind fish
with his long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate any living thing, even
ore, if he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a
secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in
the light: a ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one
thing he loved, his 'precious', and he talked to it, even when it was not
with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines.

Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on him
when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his hand an Elvish
knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo
to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo could not




guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then
he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.

Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor
back. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles.
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for
he was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came
upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten: What haw I got in my pocket?
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses.

The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question was a
mere 'question' and not a 'riddle' according to the strict rules of the
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer,
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word;
for

the thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even
though such promises were held sacred, and of old all but the wickedest
things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart
was black, and treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to the
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There,
he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his
'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all.

But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone. His
screech sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he did not yet understand
what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What
has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a
green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'.
Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he fled blindly up the passage away
from the water; and once more he was saved by his luck. For just as he ran
he put his hand in his pocket, and the ring slipped quietly on to his
finger. So it was that Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to
guard the way out, lest the 'thief should escape. Warily Bilbo followed
him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious';
from which talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him
in the darkness: he himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of
escape from the ores and from Gollum.

At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the
lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side of the mountains. There
Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to




slay him with his sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring,
in which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill the
wretched creature at a disadvantage. In the end, gathering his courage, he
leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by
his enemy's cries of hate and despair: Thief thief! Baggins! We hates it
for ever!

Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to
give him a present, if he won the game; but when Gollum went to fetch it
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very
ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum
show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts. But
many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old
hobbit himself.

Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard
it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got
the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while
strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth
important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important,
and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the
first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a 'present' was not mere
hobbitlike invention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he
confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call
the ring his 'birthday present', many times. That also Gandalf thought
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for
many more years, as will be seen in this book.

Of Bilbo's later adventures little more need be said here. With the
help of the ring he escaped from the ore-guards at the gate and rejoined his
companions. He used the ring many times on his quest, chiefly for the help
of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After




his return to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he
believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was
writing.

His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his coat of
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon -hoard, he lent to a
museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer
at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the
ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket.

He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second
year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in the Shire until Mr.
Baggins began the preparations for the celebration of his
hundred-and-eleventh birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History
begins.




NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS



At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the great
events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the Reunited Kingdom
awakened among them a more widespread interest in their own history; and
many of their traditions, up to that time still mainly oral, were collected
and Written down. The greater families were also concerned with events in
the Kingdom at large, and many of their members studied its ancient
histories and legends. By the end of the first century of the Fourth Age
there were already to be found in the Shire several libraries that contained
many historical books and records.

The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at Great
Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of the end of the Third Age is
drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important source
for

the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long
preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, Wardens of the
Westmarch. 1 It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with him
to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably m a
single red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that
Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was added
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship.

The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were
made, especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the
children of Master Samwise. The most important copy, however, has a
different history. It was kept at Great Smials, but it was written in
Condor, probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and
completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this note:
Findegil, King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy
in all details of the Thain's Book m Minas Tirith. That book was a copy,
made at the request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and




was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64.

The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and
contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received
much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated
version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside
the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the
King. But the chief importance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains
the whole of Bilbo's ’Translations from the Elvish'. These three volumes
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403
and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both
living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here.

Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their great families,
and at the same time kept up their connexions with Rohan and Gondor, the
libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did not appear
in the Red Book. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with Eriador
and the history of Rohan. Some of these were composed or begun by
Meriadoc

himself, though in the Shire he was chiefly remembered for his Herhlore of
the Shire, and for his Reckoning of Years m which he discussed the relation
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor, and
Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names in the Shire,
having special interest in discovering the kinship with the language of the
Rohirrim of such 'shire-words' as mathom and old elements in place names.

At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire-folk, though
more important for larger history. None of them was written by Peregrin, but
he and his successors collected many manuscripts written by scribes of
Gondor: mainly copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to
Elendil and his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found extensive
materials for the history of N®menor and the arising of Sauron. It was
probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years 1 was put together, with the
assistance of material collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are
often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It
is probable that Meriadoc obtained assistance and information from
Rivendell, which he visited more than once. There, though Elrond had




departed, his sons long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk.
It is said that Celeborn went to dwell there after the departure of
Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey
Havens, and with him went the last living memory of the Elder Days in
Middle-earth.




* BOOK I *



Chapter 1 . A Long-expected Party

When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly be
celebrating his eleventy -first birthday with a party of special
magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.

Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the
Shire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable disappearance and
unexpected return. The riches he had brought back from his travels had now
become a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk
might say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with
treasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was also his prolonged
vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it seemed to have little effect on
Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they
began to call him we//-preserved, but unchanged would have been nearer the
mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought this was too much
of a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess (apparently)
perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.

'It will have to be paid for,' they said. 'It isn't natural, and
trouble will come of it!'

But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with
his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good
fortune. He remained on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of
course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among
the

hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until
some of his younger cousins began to grow up.

The eldest of these, and Bilbo's favourite, was young Frodo Baggins.
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to
live at Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-Bagginses were finally
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September
22nd.

'You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,' said Bilbo one day; 'and
then we can celebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together.' At that




time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.

Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very lively
combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood that
something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was
going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number and a very
respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130);
and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33) an important number: the date of
his 'coming of age'.

Tongues began to wag in Flobbiton and By water; and rumour of the coming
event travelled all over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. Bilbo
Baggins became once again the chief topic of conversation; and the older
folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.

No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly
known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush , a small inn on the
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before
that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job
was mainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son
were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.

’A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I've always
said,' the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to
him, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting him constantly upon the
growing of vegetables - in the matter of 'roots', especially potatoes, the
Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood
(including himself).

'But what about this Frodo that lives with him?' asked Old Noakes of
By water. 'Baggins is his name, but he's more than half a Brandybuck, they
say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife
away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.'

'And no wonder they're queer,' put in Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer's
next-door neighbour), 'if they live on the wrong side of the Brandywine
River, and right agin the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half the
tales be true.'

'You're right, Dad!' said the Gaffer. 'Not that the Brandybucks of
Buck-land live in the Old Forest; but they're a queer breed, seemingly. They




fool about with boats on that big river - and that isn’t natural. Small
wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is
as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo,
and in more than looks. After all his father was a Baggins. A decent
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell of
him, till he was drownded.'

'Drownded?' said several voices. They had heard this and other darker
rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for family history,
and they were ready to hear it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer.

'You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was
our

Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest
of the Old Took's daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr.
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying
is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Flail with his
father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him
being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. '

'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' said
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.'

'And / heard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after him,' said
Sandy man, the Hobbiton miller.

'You shouldn't listen to all you hear, Sandyman,' said the Gaffer, who
did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no call to go talking of pushing
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without
looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo
left an orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer
Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred
relations in the place. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he
brought the lad back to live among decent folk.

'But I reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They
thought they were going to get Bag End, that time when he went off and was
thought to be dead. And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes
on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly
he produces an heir, and has all the papers made out proper. The




Sackville-Bagginses won’t never see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to
be hoped not.'

'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a
stranger, a visitor on business from Michel Delving in the Westfarthing.

'All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and
silver, and jools, by what I've heard. '

'Then you've heard more than I can speak to,' answered the Gaffer. I
know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came
back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I'd not long come
prentice to old Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag
End helping him to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up
the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I
don't doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn't enough
to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that. He's in and out
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all
Mr. Bilbo's tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters - meaning no harm,
mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it.

'Elves and Dragons' Isays to him. 'Cabbages and potatoes are better
for me and you. Don 't go getting mixed up in the business of your betters,
or you'll land in trouble too big for you, ' I says to him. And I might say
it to others,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.

But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of Bilbo's
wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of the younger generation of
hobbits.

'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,'
argued the miller, voicing common opinion. 'He's often away from home. And
look at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and
that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all. You can say what you like,
Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.'

'And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you
do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,' retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even
more than usual. If that's being queer, then we could do with a bit more
queerness in these parts. There's some not far away that wouldn't offer a
pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls. But




they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says that everyone's going to be
invited to the party, and there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents
for all - this very month as is.'

That very month was September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or
two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread
about that there were going to be fireworks - fireworks, what is more, such
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed since
the Old Took died.

Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon laden with
odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill
to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it.

It was driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End. At the end of the
second week in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction
of the Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all
alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver
scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond
the brim of his hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red
G and the elf-rune, .

That was Gandalf s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf the
Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to his skill with fires,
smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difficult and dangerous,
but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one of the
'attractions' at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. 'G
for Grand!' they shouted, and the old man smiled. They knew him by sight,
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but
neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his
firework displays - they now belonged to the legendary past.

When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had finished
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or cracker
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.

'Run away now!' said Gandalf. 'You will get plenty when the time
comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The
young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off,




feeling that the day of the party would never come.

Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of a
small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon was bright
and peaceful. The flowers glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and
sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in
at the round windows.

'How bright your garden looks!' said Gandalf.

'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old
Shire; but I think I need a holiday.'

'You mean to go on with your plan then?'

'I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven't changed it.'

'Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan - your
whole plan, mind - and I hope it will turn out for the best, for you, and
for all of us.'

'I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have my
little joke.'

'Who will laugh, I wonder?' said Gandalf, shaking his head.

'We shall see,' said Bilbo.

The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. There
might have been some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very week
orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind of provision, commodity,
or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the
neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off the
days on the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for
invitations.

Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton
post-office was blocked, and the Bywater post-office was snowed under, and
voluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a constant stream of
them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you,

I shall certainly come.

A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT
ON PARTY

BUSINESS. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party Business were
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off
answers, packing up presents, and making some private preparations of his
own. From the time of Gandalf s arrival he remained hidden from view.

One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo's




front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special
entrance was cut into the bank leading to the road, and wide steps and a
large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,
adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally envied. Old
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden.

The tents began to go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big
that the tree that grew in the field was right inside it, and stood proudly
near one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its
branches. More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind): an enormous open-air
kitchen was erected in the north corner of the field. A draught of cooks,
from every inn and eating-house for miles around, arrived to supplement the
dwarves and other odd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose
to its height.

Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve of the
Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday, September the 22nd, actually
dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun
began.

Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of
entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living near was
invited. A very few were overlooked by accident, but as they turned up all
the same, that did not matter. Many people from other parts of the Shire
were also asked; and there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. Ele gave away
presents to all and sundry - the latter were those who went out again by a
back way and came in again by the gate. Hobbits give presents to other
people on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not
so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in
Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year it was somebody’s birthday, so
that every hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them.

On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-children
were so excited that for a while they almost forgot about eating. There were
toys the like of which they had never seen before, all beautiful and some
obviously magical. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, and
had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale, and were of real
dwarf-make.

When every guest had been welcomed and was finally inside the gate,




there were songs, dances, music, games, and, of course, food and drink.
There were three official meals: lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But
lunch and tea were marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the
guests were sitting down and eating together. At other times there were
merely lots of people eating and drinking - continuously from elevenses
until six-thirty, when the fireworks started.

The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by him, but
designed and made by him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights
of rockets were let off by him. But there was also a generous distribution
of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles,
elf-fountains, goblin -barkers and thunder -claps. They were all superb. The
art of Gandalf improved with age.

There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing with
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches
dropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with
a sweet scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There were
fountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there were
pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing
ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a
shower of yellow rain; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang
suddenly into the air with a yell like an embattled army, and came down
again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was
also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits
exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great smoke went
up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow
at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red -golden
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his
eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three times over the
heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their faces. The
dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst over
Bywater with a deafening explosion.

That is the signal for supper!' said Bilbo. The pain and alarm
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There was
a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that is, except those invited
to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called




by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was not considered proper to use
of people); and the guests were selected from all the families to which
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the
matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.

There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and
Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins'
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and
selection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly
connected

with Bilbo, and some of them had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not
forgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in
golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing in food for many years and his table
had a high reputation.

All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast;
though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their host (an
inevitable item). Fie was liable to drag in bits of what he called poetry;
and sometimes, after a glass or two, would allude to the absurd adventures
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied,
and prolonged. The purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had depleted the
stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not
matter much.

After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of the company
were, however, now in a tolerant mood, at that delightful stage which they
called ’filling up the corners’. They were sipping their favourite drinks,
and nibbling at their favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten.

They were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.

My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ’Flear! Flear! Hear!’
they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus, seeming reluctant to




follow their own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and stood on a chair
under the illuminated tree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming
face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could
all see him standing, waving one hand in the air, the other was in his
trouser -pocket.

My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again; and my dear Tooks and
Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Hornblowers,
and

Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots.

'ProudFEET!'

shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of
course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally
furry, and both were on the table.

Proudfoots, repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that I
welcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundred and eleventh
birthday: I am eleventy -one today!' Hurray! Hurray! Many Happy Returns!'
they shouted, and they hammered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.

I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am. Deafening
cheers. Cries of Yes (and No). Noises of trumpets and horns, pipes and
flutes, and other musical instruments. There were, as has been said, many
young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of
them bore the mark DALE on them; which did not convey much to most of
the

hobbits, but they all agreed they were marvellous crackers. They contained
instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one
corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up
an impromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune. Master Everard Took
and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous.

But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he
blew three loud hoots. The noise subsided. / shall not keep you long, he
cried. Cheers from all the assembly. / have called you all together for a
Purpose. Something in the way that he said this made an impression. There
was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.

Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I am




immensely fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time
to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of
approval.

/ don 't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less
than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather
difficult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them were trying
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.

Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should say: OUR
birthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of my heir and nephew,

Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today. Some perfunctory
clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ’Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old
Frodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what
was meant by 'coming into his inheritance'. Together we score one hundred
and forty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total: One
Gross, if I may use the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of
his guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling
sure they had only been asked to fill up the required number, like goods in
a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.'

It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the
fact that it was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion. I was only
fifty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet was
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and
could only say 'thagyou very buch'. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank
you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence. They all
feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent; and they were getting
bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo
did not sing or recite. Fie paused for a moment.

Thirdly and finally, he said, I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT. Fie
spoke

this last word so loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could.

I regret to announce that - though, as I said, eleventy-one years is far too
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I am leaving
NOW. GOOD-BYE 7

He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and
the guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be
seen. One hundred and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.




Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then there
was a dead silence, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, every
Baggins, Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger,
Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to
talk

at once.

It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and more
food and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance. 'He's
mad. I always said so,' was probably the most popular comment. Even the
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour was absurd. For the
moment most of them took it for granted that his disappearance was nothing
more than a ridiculous prank.

But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure. Neither age nor an enormous
dinner had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter-in-law, Esmeralda:
'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off
again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.'

He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again.

Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he
had sat silent beside Bilbo's empty chair, and ignored all remarks and
questions. He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even though he had been in
the know. He had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant
surprise of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: he
realized suddenly that he loved the old hobbit dearly. Most of the guests
went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and
present; but the Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo
did not want to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently to the
health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion.

As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he had been
fingering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic ring that he had kept
secret for so many years. As he stepped down he slipped it on his finger,
and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again.

He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment listening
with a smile to the din in the pavilion and to the sounds of merrymaking in
other parts of the field. Then he went in. He took off his party clothes,
folded up and wrapped in tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and
put it away. Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments, and fastened




round his waist a worn leather belt. On it he hung a short sword in a
battered black-leather scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if
they were very precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that
their original colour could hardly be guessed: it might have been dark
green. They were rather too large for him. He then went into his study, and
from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a
leather -bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. The book and
bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bag that was standing there,
already nearly full. Into the envelope he slipped his golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put
it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.

'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.'

'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down in a
chair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feel
that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?'

'Yes, I do,' said Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it quite
startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of your own, I
suppose?'

It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years, and it
seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to
explain your sudden vanishment.'

'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.'

'I do - when I know anything. But I don't feel too sure about this
whole affair. It has now come to the final point. You have had your joke,
and alarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the whole Shire
something to talk about for nine days, or ninety-nine more likely. Are you
going any further?'

'Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as I have
told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don't expect I shall
return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements.

'I am old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in
my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!' he snorted. 'Why, I feel all
thin, sort of stretched, if you know what I mean: like butter that has been
scraped over too much bread. That can't be right. I need a change, or




something.'

Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. 'No, it does not seem
right,' he said thoughtfully. 'No, after all I believe your plan is probably
the best.'

'Well, I've made up my mind, anyway. I want to see mountains again,
Gandalf, mountains, and then find somewhere where I can rest. In peace and
quiet, without a lot of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded
visitors hanging on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish my
book. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived happily ever
after to the end of his days. '

Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however
it ends.'

'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?'

'Yes, I will - two eyes, as often as I can spare them.'

'He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he offered
to once, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet. I want
to see the wild country again before I die, and the Mountains; but he is
still in love with the Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers. He
ought to be comfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course,
except a few oddments. I hope he will be happy, when he gets used to being
on his own. It's time he was his own master now.'

'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring as well? You agreed to that, you
remember.'

'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.

'Where is it?'

'In an envelope, if you must know,' said Bilbo impatiently. 'There on
the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!' He hesitated. 'Isn't
that odd now?' he said softly to himself. 'Yet after all, why not? Why
shouldn't it stay there?'

Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his
eyes. 'I think, Bilbo,' he said quietly, 'I should leave it behind. Don't
you want to?'

'Well yes - and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it at
all, I may say. And I don't really see why I should. Why do you want me to?'
he asked, and a curious change came over his voice. It was sharp with




suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but
you

have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.'

'No, but I had to badger you,' said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It
was important. Magic rings are - well, magical; and they are rare and
curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also
I think you have had it quite long enough. You won't need it any more.
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.'

Bilbo flushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His kindly
face grew hard. 'Why not?' he cried. 'And what business is it of yours,
anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my own. I found it. It
came to me.'

'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.'

'If I am it is your fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I tell you. My
own. My precious. Yes, my precious.'

The wizard's face remained grave and attentive, and only a flicker in
his deep eyes showed that he was startled and indeed alarmed. 'It has been
called that before,' he said, 'but not by you.'

'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's
not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.'

Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. 'You will be a fool if you do.

Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has got
far too much hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and be
free.'

'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately.

'Now, now, my dear hobbit! ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we have
been friends, and you owe me something. Come! Do as you promised: give it
up! '

'Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you
won't get it. I won't give my precious away, I tell you.' His hand strayed
to the hilt of his small sword.

Gandalf s eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said.

If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalf the Grey
uncloaked.' He took a step towards the hobbit, and he seemed to grow tall
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room.

Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching at




his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air of the
room tingled. Gandalf s eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly his hands
relaxed, and he began to tremble.

'I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,' he said. 'You have
never been like this before. What is it all about? It is mine isn't it? I
found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not a
thief, whatever he said.'

'I have never called you one,' Gandalf answered. 'And I am not one
either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would trust
me, as you used.' He turned away, and the shadow passed. He seemed to
dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled.

Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt so
queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any
more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was
like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and
disappear, don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to
make sure. I tried locking it up, but I found I couldn't rest without it in
my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.'

'Then trust mine,' said Gandalf. 'It is quite made up. Go away and
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after
him.'

Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. 'All
right,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, and
smiled rather ruefully. 'After all that's what this party business was all
about, really: to give away lots of birthday presents, and somehow make it
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in the
end, but it would be a pity to waste all my preparations. It would quite
spoil the joke.'

'Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,'
said Gandalf.

'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo with all the rest.' He drew
a deep breath. 'And now I really must be starting, or somebody else will
catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn't bear to do it all over
again.' He picked up his bag and moved to the door.

'You have still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well,
so I have!' cried Bilbo. 'And my will and all the other documents too. You
had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.'




'No, don’t give the ring to me,' said Gandalf. 'Put it on the
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait
for him.'

Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set it by the
clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the floor. Before he
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set it in its place.

A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit's face again. Suddenly it
gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said. 'Now
I'm off!'

They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick from the
stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different rooms where
they had been busy.

'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and labelled?'

'Everything,' they answered.

'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door.

It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked
up, sniffing the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the Road
with dwarves ! This is what I have really been longing for, for years !
Good-bye! ' he said, looking at his old home and bowing to the door.
'Good-bye, Gandalf!'

'Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! You are old
enough, and perhaps wise enough.'

'Take care! I don't care. Don't you worry about me! I am as happy now
as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come.

I am being swept off my feet at last,' he added, and then in a low voice, as
if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:

The Road goes ever on and on

Down from the door where it began.

Now far ahead the Road has gone,

And I must follow, if I can,

Pursuing it with eager feet,

Until it joins some larger way

Where many paths and errands meet.

And whither then? I cannot say.

He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word he turned
away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his
three companions went round into his garden, and trotted down the long




sloping path. He jumped over a low place in the hedge at the bottom, and
took to the meadows, passing into the night like a rustle of wind in the
grass.

Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness.
’Goodbye, my dear Bilbo - until our next meeting!' he said softly and went
back indoors.

Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep
in thought. 'Has he gone?' he asked.

'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.'

' I wish - 1 mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,'
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart that he really meant to go. He always
used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come back sooner, just to
see him off.'

I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,' said
Gandalf. 'Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right - now. He left a packet
for you. There it is!'

Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it, but
did not open it.

'You'll find his will and all the other documents in there, I think,'
said the wizard. 'You are the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy,
you'll find a golden ring.'

'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still,
it may be useful.'

'It may, and it may not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it,
if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.'

As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye to
the guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over the field,
but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared up in the
morning. About midnight carriages came for the important folk. One by one
they rolled away, filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners
came by arrangement, and removed in wheel-barrows those that had
inadvertently remained behind.

Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather later.
Morning went on. People came and began (by orders) to clear away the
pavilions and the tables and the chairs, and the spoons and knives and
bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and
the crumbs and cracker -paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and




handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item). Then a number of
other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and
Tooks, and other guests that lived or were staying near. By mid-day, when
even the best-fed were out and about again, there was a large crowd at Bag
End, uninvited but not unexpected.

Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and
worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more to say than
before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo Baggins has
gone away; as far as I know, for good.' Some of the visitors he invited to
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them.

Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packages and
parcels and small articles of furniture. On every item there was a label
tied. There were several labels of this sort:

For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo, on an umbrella.
Adelard

had carried off many unlabelled ones.

For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspondence, with love
from

Bilbo, on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest
surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had
written reams of good advice for more than half a century.

For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B., on a gold pen
and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters.

For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo, on a round convex mirror. She
was

a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely.

For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a contributor, on an
(empty) book -case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than usual
at returning them.

For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT, on a case of
silver

spoons. Bilbo believed that she had acquired a good many of his spoons,
while he was away on his former journey. Fobelia knew that quite well. When
she arrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she also took
the spoons.

This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo's
residence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of his long




life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the
custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of
course, that the birthday-presents were always new, there were one or two
old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all around the district;
but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and kept those that he received.
The old hole was now being cleared a little.

Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written out
personally by Bilbo, and several had some point, or some joke. But, of
course, most of the things were given where they would be wanted and
welcome. The poorer hobbits, and especially those of Bagshot Row, did very
well. Old Gaffer Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen
waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints. Old Rory
Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozen bottles of Old
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as
it had been laid down by Bilbo's father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted
him a capital fellow after the first bottle.

There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all the
chief treasures, as well as the books, pictures, and more than enough
furniture, were left in his possession. There was, however, no sign nor
mention of money or jewellery: not a penny -piece or a glass bead was given
away.

Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that the
whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and before
long the place was packed with people who had no business there, but could
not be kept out. Fabels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off
with minor items not addressed to them, or with anything that seemed
unwanted or unwatched. The road to the gate was blocked with barrows and
handcarts.

In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo
had retired for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye
on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.

'He is indisposed,' he said. 'He is resting.'

'Hiding, you mean,' said Fobelia. 'Anyway we want to see him and we
mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!'

Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover
their parting gift of spoons. It did not improve their tempers. Eventually




they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at
any rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he
spoke quite politely.

The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by offering
him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valuable and
unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the things specially
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very
fishy.

'Only one thing is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that is that you are
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.'

Otho would have been Bilbo's heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He
read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink).

'Foiled again!' he said to his wife. 'And after waiting sixty years.

Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out
of the study to see how things were going on and found her still about the
place, investigating nooks and comers and tapping the floors. He escorted
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her
face looked as if she was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:

'You'll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn't you go too? You
don't belong here; you're no Baggins - you - you're a Brandybuck!'

'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo
as he shut the door on her.

'It was a compliment,' said Merry Brandybuck, 'and so, of course, not
true.'

Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits (two
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of one of the
cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo
Proudfoot's grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry,
where he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both
curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not
positively ill-gotten), is, as every one knows, any one's for the finding




-unless the search is interrupted.

When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on
chair in the hall. It's time to close the shop, Merry,' he said. 'Lock the
door, and don’t open it to anyone today, not even if they bring a battering
ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea.

He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door.
'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of something
really nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.'

He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder, but he
took no notice. Suddenly the wizard's head appeared at the window.

'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your
hole and out through the hill,' he said.

'My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room
to the door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.'

'Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap
towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.'

'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's
ring. I longed to disappear.'

'Don't do that!' said Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be careful of that
ring, Frodo ! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last
word.'

'Well, what about it?'

'What do you know already?'

'Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and
how he used it: on his journey, I mean.'

'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf.

'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He
told me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said you had
pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets between
us, Frodo," he said; "but they are not to go any further. It's mine
anyway.'"

'That's interesting,' said Gandalf. 'Well, what did you think of it
all?'

'If you mean, inventing all that about a "present", well, I thought the
true story much more likely, and I couldn't see the point of altering it at
all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I thought it rather
odd.'




'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures
- if they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful with it.

It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.'

'I don't understand,' said Frodo.

'Neither do I,' answered the wizard. 'I have merely begun to wonder
about the ring, especially since last night. No need to worry. But if you
take my advice you will use it very seldom, or not at all. At least I beg
you not to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say
again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!'

'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?'

'I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to tell you
something when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for
the present.' He got up.

'At once!' cried Frodo. 'Why, I thought you were staying on for at
least a week. I was looking forward to your help.'

'I did mean to - but I have had to change my mind. I may be away for a
good while; but I'll come and see you again, as soon as I can. Expect me
when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan't often be visiting the
Shire openly again. I find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I
am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actually
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.'

'Some people!' exclaimed Frodo. 'You mean Otho and Lobelia. How
abominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else, if I could get
Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with him. I love the Shire.
But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever
see him again.'

'So do I,' said Gandalf. 'And I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!
Take care of yourself! Lookout for me, especially at unlikely times !
Good-bye!'

Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusually
bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not
see him again for a long time.




Chapter 2 . The Shadow of the Past



The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety -nine days. The second
disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all
over the Shire, for a year and a day, and was remembered much longer than
that. It became a fireside -story for young hobbits; and eventually Mad
Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long
after all the true events were forgotten.

But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that
Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and
had run off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a
river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame was
mostly laid on Gandalf.

'If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps
he'll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,' they said. And to all
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning; and
the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo's hundred-and-twelfth
birthday, which he called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was short of the
mark, for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say.

Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving
Bilbo's Birthday Party year after year until they got used to it. He said
that he did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked: 'Where is he then?'
he shrugged his shoulders.

He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends,
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took)
who had as children been fond of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End.
Folco Boffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real
name was Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping
all

over the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the
amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far from home walking in




the hills and woods under the starlight. Merry and Pippin suspected that he
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done.

As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of
good ’preservation': outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust and
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. ’Some folk have all the luck,’ they
said; but it was not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of
fifty that they began to think it queer.

Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For some years he was
quite happy and did not worry much about the future. But half unknown to
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He
found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his
dreams. He began to say to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the River myself
one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.'

So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftieth
birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehow
significant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that adventure had
suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths
seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond
their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its
borders. He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking
and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in
the Shire.

There were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside;
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the
Shire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road
in unusual numbers. The ancient East -West Road ran through the Shire to its
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their
mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits' chief source of news
from distant parts - if they wanted any: as a rule dwarves said little and
hobbits asked no more. But now Frodo often met strange dwarves of far
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in




whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.

That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past, like a
shadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous and
disquieting. It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been driven out
by the White Council only to reappear in greater strength in the old
strongholds of Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. From
there the power was spreading far and wide, and away far east and south
there were wars and growing fear. Ores were multiplying again in the
mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but cunning and armed
with dreadful weapons. And there were murmured hints of creatures more
terrible than all these, but they had no name.

Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits.

But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer tales; and
those whose business took them to the borders saw strange things. The
conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of
Frodo's fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them.

Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and opposite him
was Ted Sandyman, the miller's son; and there were various other rustic
hobbits listening to their talk.

’Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said Sam.

'Ah,' said Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales
and children's stories at home, if I want to.'

'No doubt you can,' retorted Sam, 'and I daresay there's more truth in
some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories anyway? Take
dragons
now.'

'No thank 'ee,' said Ted, 'I won't. I heard tell of them when I was a
youngster, but there's no call to believe in them now. There's only one
Dragon in By water, and that's Green,' he said, getting a general laugh.

'All right,' said Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But what about these
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that one bigger
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.'

'Who's theyT

'My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up
to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.'

'Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal's always saying he's seen things; and




maybe he sees things that ain't there.'

'But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven
yards to a stride, if it was an inch.'

'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw was an elm tree, as like as
not.'

'But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain't no elm tree on
the North Moors.'

'Then Hal can't have seen one,' said Ted. There was some laughing and
clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point.

'All the same,' said Sam, 'you can't deny that others besides our
Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire - crossing it, mind you:
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders have never
been so busy before.

'And I've heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they are
going to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers.' Sam waved his
arm

vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the
old towers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was an old
tradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens, from which at times
elven-ships set sail, never to return.

'They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into
the West and leaving us,' said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking his
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.

'Well, that isn't anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I
don't see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! But I warrant you
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.'

'Well I don't know,' said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had once
seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day. Of all the
legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and
half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always
moved him most deeply. 'There are some, even in these parts, as know the
Fair Folk and get news of them,' he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I
work for. He told me that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more: many's the talk I had with him when I was a
little lad.'

'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked,
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where you get your news from, you'll never




want for moonshine. Well, friends, I'm off home. Your good health!' He
drained his mug and went out noisily.

Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For
one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But
Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up
and went out.

It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain. The
sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into night. He
walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and up the Hill,
whistling softly and thoughtfully.

It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he paid
Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again.
During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often, coming
unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise. He
would not discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings.

Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo
had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard would
never return and had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as
Sam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar
tap on the study window.

Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. They
looked hard at one another.

’Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!'

'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked
older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide
world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the
night.

Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with Frodo
by the open window of the study. A bright fire was on the hearth, but the
sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and
the new green of Spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the
trees' fingers.

Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when
Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps




whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps
longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke -rings with the same vigour and
delight.

He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep in
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.

'Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring,

Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters
were best left until daylight. Don't you think you had better finish now?

You say the ring is dangerous, far more dangerous than I guess. In what
way?'

'In many ways,' answered the wizard. It is far more powerful than I
ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the end it would utterly
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him.

'In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as you
call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more potent and
some less. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft before it was
full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but trifles - yet still to my
mind dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings of Power, they
were perilous.

'A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not die, but
he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues, until at last
every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the Ring to make himself
invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks
in the twilight under the eye of the dark power that rules the Rings. Yes,
sooner or later - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but
neither strength nor good purpose will last - sooner or later the dark power
will devour him.'

'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.

'How long have you known this?' asked Frodo at length. 'And how much
did Bilbo know?'

'Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,' said Gandalf. 'He
would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would
be a danger, even though I promised to look after you. He thought the ring
was very beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong or




queer, it was himself. He said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was
always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to
blame. Though he had found out that the thing needed looking after; it did
not seem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd
way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.'

'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo, 'so I have
always kept it on its chain.'

'Very wise,' said Gandalf. 'But as for his long life, Bilbo never
connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to
himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and
uneasy. Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting
control.'

'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again.

'Known?' said Gandalf. 'I have known much that only the Wise know,
Frodo. But if you mean "known about this ring", well, I still do not know,
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.

'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back in memory.

'Let me see - it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark power
from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found his
ring. A shadow fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was
- that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story
of how he had "won" it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the
truth out of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to
the ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his "birthday present". The
lies were too much alike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had an unwholesome
power that set to work on its keeper at once. That was the first real
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little
else that I could do. I could not take it from him without doing greater
harm; and I had no right to do so anyway. I could only watch and wait. I
might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held
me
back.'

'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.'

'Maybe not,' answered Gandalf. 'Hobbits are, or were, no concern of
his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order and the




head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it,
and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small,
is his province. He has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their
making; but when the Rings were debated in the Council, all that he would
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept - but
uneasily. Still I watched and I waited.

'And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they
passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of age. The
shadow fell on me again. But I said to myself: "After all he comes of a
long-lived family on his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!"

'And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He said and
did things then that filled me with a fear that no words of Saruman could
allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.'

'There wasn't any permanent harm done, was there?' asked Frodo
anxiously. 'He would get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in
peace, I mean?'

'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I
know there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the
Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of
knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, and yet
sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely that some would
resist the Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe. I don't
think you need worry about Bilbo.

'Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so it
might take a long while for the influence to wear off - before it was safe
for him to see it again, for instance. Otherwise, he might live on for
years, quite happily: just stop as he was when he parted with it. For he
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thing go. It is for
you that I feel responsible.

'Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you, and
about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be a grievous
blow to the world, if the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all your kind,
jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.'




Frodo shuddered. 'But why should we be?' he asked. 'And why should he
want such slaves?'

'To tell you the truth,' replied Gandalf, 'I believe that hitherto -
hitherto, mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits.

You should be thankful. But your safety has passed. He does not need you -
he has many more useful servants - but he won't forget you again. And
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and
free. There is such a thing as malice and revenge.'

'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what
all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.'

'It has everything to do with it,' said Gandalf. 'You do not know the
real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last
here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.'

Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain
that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly to the
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.

Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold. 'Can
you see any markings on it?' he asked.

'No,' said Frodo. 'There are none. It is quite plain, and it never
shows a scratch or sign of wear.'

'Well then, look!' To Frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. Frodo
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back.

'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look from
under his bristling brows.

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up,
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. The room
became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the
windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped.

It is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received it on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever.

'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!'

As Frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest
pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that




seemed to form the letters of a flowing script. They shone piercingly
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth.

I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice.

'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancient
mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here. But
this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:

One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,

One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.

It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:

Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,

Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,

Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,

One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.

One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them,

One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. '

He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: 'This is the
Master -ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring that he
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He greatly desires
it - but he must not get it.'

Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast
hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf him.
'This ring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?'

'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back
in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If I were to
tell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when Spring had
passed into Winter.

'But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark Lord. The
rumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again and left
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the Dark Tower
of Mordor. That name even you hobbits have heard of, like a shadow on the
borders of old stories. Always after a defeat and a respite, the Shadow
takes another shape and grows again.'

'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo.

'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But




that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the
time that is given, us. And already, Frodo, our time is beginning to look
black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are far from ripe,

I think, but they are ripening. We shall be hard put to it. We should be
very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance.

'The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to
beat down all resistance, break the last defences, and cover all the lands
in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring.

'The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and his hand
never touched them or sullied them. Seven the Dwarf-kings possessed, but
three he has recovered, and the others the dragons have consumed. Nine he
gave to Mortal Men, proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago they
fell under the dominion of the One, and they became Ringwraiths, shadows
under his great Shadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a
year since the Nine walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows
once

more, they too may walk again. But come! We will not speak of such things
even in the morning of the Shire.

'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also, or
else they are destroyed. The Three are hidden still. But that no longer
troubles him. He only needs the One; for he made that Ring himself, it is
his, and he let a great part of his own former power pass into it, so that
he could rule all the others. If he recovers it, then he will command them
all again, wherever they be, even the Three, and all that has been wrought
with them will be laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever.

'And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One had
perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been done. But he
knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking
it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on it. It is his great hope and
our great fear.'

'Why, why wasn't it destroyed?' cried Frodo. 'And how did the Enemy
ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious to him?'

He clutched the Ring in his hand, as if he saw already dark fingers
stretching out to seize it.

'It was taken from him,' said Gandalf. 'The strength of the Elves to
resist him was greater long ago; and not all Men were estranged from them.
The Men of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient




history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain.

One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in
full by one who knows it best.

'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how this thing
came to you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that I will say. It
was Gil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron,
though they themselves perished in the deed; and Isildur Elendil's son cut
the Ring from Sauron's hand and took it for his own. Then Sauron was
vanquished and his spirit fled and was hidden for long years, until his
shadow took shape again in Mirkwood.

'But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, Anduin, and
vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the River,
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Ores of the Mountains, and
almost all his folk were slain. He leaped into the waters, but the Ring
slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Ores saw him and killed him
with arrows.'

Gandalf paused. 'And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden Fields,'
he said, 'the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and even so much of
its history is known now only to a few, and the Council of the Wise could
discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think.

'Fong after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the
Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever -handed and quiet-footed
little people. I guess they were of hobbit -kind; akin to the fathers of the
fathers of the Stoors, for they loved the River, and often swam in it, or
made little boats of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute,
for it was large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother
of the folk, stern and wise in old lore, such as they had. The most
inquisitive and curious-minded of that family was called Smjagol. He was
interested in roots and beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed
under trees and growing plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he
ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the flowers
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward.

'He had a friend called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper -eyed but not
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden
Fields, where there were great beds of iris and flowering reeds. There
Smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and




fished. Suddenly a great fish took his hook, and before he knew where he
was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to the bottom. Then he let
go of his line, for he thought he saw something shining in the river-bed;
and holding his breath he grabbed at it.

'Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful of
mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the mud away,
there

in his hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in the
sun, so that his heart was glad. But Smjagol had been watching him from
behind a tree, and as Deal gloated over the ring, Smjagol came softly up
behind.

"'Give us that, Deal, my love," said Smjagol, over his friend's
shoulder.

'"Why?" said Deal.

' "Because it's my birthday, my love, and I wants it," said Smjagol.

'"I don't care," said Deal. "I have given you a present already, more
than I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it."

' "Oh, are you indeed, my love," said Smjagol; and he caught Deal by
the throat and strangled him, because the gold looked so bright and
beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger.

'No one ever found out what had become of Deal; he was murdered far
from home, and his body was cunningly hidden. But Smjagol returned alone;
and he found that none of his family could see him, when he was wearing the
ring. He was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it; and he
used it to find out secrets, and he put his knowledge to crooked and
malicious uses. He became sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was
hurtful. The ring had given him power according to his stature. It is not to
be wondered at that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when
visible)

by all his relations. They kicked him, and he bit their feet. He took to
thieving, and going about muttering to himself, and gurgling in his throat.

So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and
his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him
out of her hole.

'He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of the
world, and he journeyed up the River, till he came to a stream that flowed
down from the mountains, and he went that way. He caught fish in deep pools




with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as he
was bending over a pool, he felt a burning on the back of his head) and a
dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he
had almost forgotten about the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and
shook his fist at her.

'But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far above the tops of the Misty
Mountains, out of which the stream came. And he thought suddenly: "It would
be cool and shady under those mountains. The Sun could not watch me there.
The roots of those mountains must be roots indeed; there must be great
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning."

’So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little
cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggot
into the heart of the hills, and vanished out of all knowledge. The Ring
went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had
begun

to grow again, could learn nothing of it.'

'Gollum!' cried Frodo. 'Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!'

'I think it is a sad story,' said the wizard, 'and it might have
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.'

'I can't believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however
distantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!'

'It is true all the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their origins, at
any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo's story
suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background of their
minds and memories that was very similar. They understood one another
remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a
Dwarf, or an Ore, or even an Elf. Think of the riddles they both knew, for
one thing.'

'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and
of much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat. Gollum meant to cheat all
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay
it amused his wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.'

'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else in
it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly ruined. He
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed -as a hobbit




might. There was a little corner of his mind that was still his own, and
light came through it, as through a chink in the dark: light out of the
past. It was actually pleasant, I think, to hear a kindly voice again,
bringing up memories of wind, and trees, and sun on the grass, and such
forgotten things.

'But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier in
the end - unless it could be conquered. Unless it could be cured.' Gandalf
sighed. 'Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no hope. No,
not though he possessed the Ring so long, almost as far back as he can
remember. For it was long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness
it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never "faded". He is thin and tough
still. But the thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had
become almost unbearable.

'All the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned out to be just
empty night: there was nothing more to find out, nothing worth doing, only
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering. He was altogether wretched.
He hated the dark, and he hated light more: he hated everything, and the
Ring most of all.'

'What do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his precious and
the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn't he get rid of
it, or go away and leave it?'

'You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,'
said Gandalf. 'He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. He
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.

'A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off
treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the
idea of handing it on to someone else's care - and that only at an early
stage, when it first begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo alone in
history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my
help, too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast it
aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things.

The Ring left him. '

'What, just in time to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an Ore have
suited it better?'

'It is no laughing matter,' said Gandalf. 'Not for you. It was the
strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo's arrival
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.




'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was trying to
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him;
then when a chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after
that Gollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no further use of him:
he was too small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never
leave his deep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and
sending out his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to
be

picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!

'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the
Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant to
find the Ring, and not by its maker. In which case you also were meant to
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.'

It is not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure that I understand you.

But how have you learned all this about the Ring, and about Gollum? Do you
really know it all, or are you just guessing still?'

Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much and I have
learned much,' he answered. 'But I am not going to give an account of all my
doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known
to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire- writing
alone, apart from any other evidence.' 'And when did you discover that?'
asked Frodo, interrupting. 'Just now in this room, of course,' answered the
wizard sharply. 'But I expected to find it. I have come back from dark
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof, and
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the
gap in the history, required some thought. I may have started with guesses
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.'

'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement.

'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I tried long
ago; but I have managed it at last.'

'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?'

'Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was willing to
tell - though not, of course, in the way I have reported it. Gollum is a
liar, and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the Ring his
"birthday present", and he stuck to that. He said it came from his
grandmother, who had lots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous
story. I have no doubt that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch, a great




person in her way, but to talk of her possessing many Elven-rings was
absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie. But a lie with a grain of
truth.

'The murder of Deal haunted Gollum, and he had made up a defence,
repeating it to his "precious" over and over again, as he gnawed bones in
the dark, until he almost believed it. It was his birthday. Deal ought to
have given the ring to him. It had previously turned up just so as to be a
present. It was his birthday present, and so on, and on.

I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desperately
important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him,
and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with much
snivelling and snarling. He thought he was misunderstood and ill-used. But
when he had at last told me his history, as far as the end of the
Riddle-game and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more, except in dark
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was
going to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked,
and driven into a hole and then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good
friends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That
was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What is more, he
knew where he came from.'

'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo.

'Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself; and
after that it would not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum
came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than
his fear of the Ores, or even of the light. After a year or two he left the
mountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, the Ring was no
longer devouring him; he began to revive a little. He felt old, terribly
old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry.

'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he always
will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide from daylight and
moonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly by dead of night with his
pale cold eyes, and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grew
stronger and bolder with new food and new air. He found his way into
Mirkwood, as one would expect.'

'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo.

'I saw him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered
far, following Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to learn anything from him




for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted by curses and threats.

"What had it got in its pocketses?" he said. "It wouldn't say, no precious.

Little cheat. Not a fair question. It cheated first, it did. It broke the
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!"

’That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had
weary days of it. But from hints dropped among the snarls I even gathered
that his padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth, and even to the
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name and
knew where he came from. We had made no secret of our return journey to his
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.'

'Then why didn't he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't he
come to the Shire?'

'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set
out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But then he turned
aside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure. No, something else
drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.

'The Wood -elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail
was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and back again it led them, though
they never caught him. The wood was full of the rumour of him, dreadful
tales even among beasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was some
new

terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to find nests; it
crept into holes to find the young; it slipped through windows to find
cradles.

'But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered
off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then
I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may
prove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I had much else to
think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman.

'Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo
left here. And my search would have been in vain, but for the help that I
had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age
of the world. Together we sought for Gollum down the whole length of
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned




out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with him.

’What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and called us
cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he whined
and cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his fingers as if they
pained him, as if he remembered some old torture. But I am afraid there is
no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by
mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.'

A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating.

Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's shears could now be
heard.

’Yes, to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them there. The Ring
of the Enemy would leave its mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And
all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred
of the West. There were his fine new friends, who would help him in his
revenge !

'Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too much for his
comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on the borders he would
be caught, and taken - for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When
he was found he had already been there long, and was on his way back. On
some errand of mischief. But that does not matter much now. His worst
mischief was done.

'Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the One has been
found again. He knows where Isildur fell. He knows where Gollum found his
ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that
it is not one of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endure
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are
accounted for. He knows that it is the One. And he has at last heard, I
think, of hobbits and the Shire.

'The Shire - he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already found
out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think that the
long -unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.'

'But this is terrible!' cried Frodo. 'Far worse than the worst that I
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I
to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!'

'Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike




without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so
little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end, because he began his
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.'

'I am sorry,' said Frodo. 'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any
pity for Gollum.'

'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in.

'No, and I don't want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you
mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on after all those
horrible deeds? Now at any rate he is as bad as an Ore, and just an enemy.
He deserves death.'

'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager to
deal out death in judgement. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. I
have not much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is a
chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells
me that he has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and
when that comes, the pity of Bilbo may rule the fate of many - yours not
least. In any case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched.

The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as
they can find in their wise hearts.'

'All the same,' said Frodo, 'even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had
not got it! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn't you make me throw it
away, or, or destroy it?'

'Let you? Make you?' said the wizard. 'Haven't you been listening to
all that I have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying. But as
for throwing it away, that was obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of
being found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst of all, it
might have fallen into the hands of the Enemy. Indeed it certainly would;
for this is the One, and he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it
to himself.

'Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has
troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to take some
risk - though even when I was far away there has never been a day when the
Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I
did not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on you, not for
evil, not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine




years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.'

'But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long ago?'
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even sent me a message, I would
have done away with it.'

'Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?'

'No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.'

'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!'

Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It now
appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he could see. The
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was
its colour, how perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing and
altogether precious. When he took it out he had intended to fling it from
him into the very hottest part of the fire. But he found now that he could
not do so, not without a great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand,
hesitating, and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him;
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away -
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket.

Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily
let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not "make" you - except by
force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking the Ring, force is
useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine.

'Your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. This
Ring has already passed through it unscathed, and even unheated. But there
is no smith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the
anvils and furnaces of the Dwarves could do that. It has been said that
dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not now
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was there
ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the
One

Ring, the Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself. There is only
one way: to find the Cracks of Doom in the depths of Orodruin, the
Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it,
to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever.'

'I do really wish to destroy it!' cried Frodo. 'Or, well, to have it
destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen the
Ring ! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?'




’Such questions cannot be answered,' said Gandalf. 'You may be sure
that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for power or
wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you must therefore use
such strength and heart and wits as you have.'

'But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise and
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?'

'No!' cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. 'With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain a power
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face was lit as by
a fire within. 'Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark
Lord himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pity for
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do not tempt me! I dare not
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too
great, for my strength. I shall have such need of it. Great perils lie
before me.'

He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters.
Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along the path
outside whistling. 'And now,' said the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the
decision lies with you. But I will always help you.' He laid his hand on
Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this burden, as long as It is yours
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.'

There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at his
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the lids he
was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the
hearth, until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down
into profound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.

'Well!' said Gandalf at last. 'What are you thinking about? Have you
decided what to do?'

'No!' answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the window he
could see the sunlit garden. 'Or perhaps, yes. As far as I understand what
you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the
present, whatever it may do to me.'

'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with
that purpose,' said Gandalf.

'I hope so,' said Frodo. 'But I hope that you may find some other




better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger, a
danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep the Ring and stay here. I
ought to leave Bag End, leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.’ He
sighed.

'I should like to save the Shire, if I could - though there have been
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have
felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be good for them.
But I don't feel like that now. I feel that as long as the Shire lies
behind, safe and comfortable, I shall find wandering more bearable: I shall
know that somewhere there is a firm foothold, even if my feet cannot stand
there again.

'Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's or better, ending
in peace. But this would mean exile, a flight from danger into danger,
drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and
save the Shire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well -
desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.'

He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to
follow Bilbo flamed up in his heart - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps to
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done
on a similar morning long ago.

'My dear Frodo!' exclaimed Gandalf. 'Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to know
about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not even
from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he little
thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring
will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own
sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or
in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr.
Underhill.

'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can
trust, and who would be willing to go by your side - and that you would be
willing to take into unknown perils. But if you look for a companion, be
careful in choosing! And be careful of what you say, even to your closest




friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.'

Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was
very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the window.
Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head
hauled by
one ear.

'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what
may you be doing?'

'Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I was
just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow me.' He
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.

'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time since I last heard the
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?'

'Eavesdropping, sir? I don't follow you, begging your pardon. There
ain't no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.'

'Don't be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?'
Gandalf s eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.

'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't
let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would take on so. I
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!'

'He won't hurt you,' said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as I
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight
away!'

'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir, and
dragons, and a fiery mountain, and - and Elves, sir. I listened because I
couldn't help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do
love tales of that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say.
Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them. Couldn't you take me to see
Elves, sir, when you go?'

Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come inside!' he shouted, and putting out
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all,
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves,
eh?' he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face.

'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?'




'I did, sir. And that's why I choked: which you heard seemingly. I
tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.'

'It can't be helped, Sam,' said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized
that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely
saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to go.
But' - and here he looked hard at Sam - 'if you really care about me, you
will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of
what you've heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes.'

Sam fell on his knees, trembling. 'Get up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I have
thought of something better than that. Something to shut your mouth, and
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!'

'Me, sir!' cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk. 'Me
go and see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears.




Chapter 3 . Three is Company



'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,' said Gandalf. Two
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to

go-

'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.'

'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all!

I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way of slipping out of
the Shire without its being generally known, it will be worth a little
delay. But you must not delay too long.'

'What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?' asked Frodo. 'I
think I could probably make some arrangements by then.'

To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come
to the point. Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than it had for
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think
more kindly of journeying, as it always did at that season. He had indeed
privately made up his mind to leave on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo's one
hundred and twenty-eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one
thing that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But he did
not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was always
difficult to tell.

He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will
do - but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In the
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!
And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him
into a toad.'

'As for where I am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be difficult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.'

'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I am not warning you against leaving
an address at the post-office! But you are leaving the Shire - and that
should not be known, until you are far away. And you must go, or at least




set out, either North, South, West or East - and the direction should
certainly not be known.'

'I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and of
saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction,' said
Frodo. 'For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What is to be my
quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose
one, and not return, as far as I can see.'

'But you cannot see very far,' said Gandalf. 'Neither can I. It may be
your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do
not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.'

'No indeed!' said Frodo. 'But in the meantime what course am I to
lake?'

'Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,' answered the
wizard. 'If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey should not
prove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will
grow worse as the year fails.'

'Rivendell!' said Frodo. 'Very good: I will go east, and I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He
spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to see the
house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep valley where
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.

One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush
and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed
he had already sold it - to the Sackville-Bagginses!

'For a nice bit, loo,' said some. 'At a bargain price,' said others,

'and that's more likely when Mistress Fobelia's the buyer.' (Otho had died
some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)

Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more
debatable than the price. A few held the theory - supported by the nods and
hints of Mr. Baggins himself - that Frodo's money was running out: he was
going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale
down in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. 'As far from the
Sackville-Bagginses as may be,' some added. But so firmly fixed had the
notion of the immeasurable wealth of the Bagginses of Bag End become that
most found this hard to believe, harder than any other reason or unreason
that their fancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet




unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the Bag End'. But
however a removal might fit in with the designs of his wizardry, there was
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.

'Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,' he said. 'Merry Brandybuck is
looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.'

As a matter of fact with Merry's help he had already chosen and bought
a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all but
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on the
eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had lived there in childhood his
going back would at least seem credible.

Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one evening, at
the end of June, soon after Frodo's plan had been finally arranged, he
suddenly announced that he was going off again next morning. 'Only for a
short while, I hope,' he said. 'But I am going down beyond the southern
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.'

He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried.

'Has anything happened?' he asked.

'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs
looking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get off at once,

I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick
to your plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the Ring. Fet me
impress on you once more: don't use it!'

He went off at dawn. 'I may be back any day,' he said. 'At the very
latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think after all you may
need my company on the Road.'

At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what
Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine
weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had seldom seen so
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.

Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf
again. September was passing and there was still no news of him. The
Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did not come, or send
word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to stay and
help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and




of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between
them

they turned the whole place upside-down.

On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home,
by way of the Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious,
and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,
dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was
quite small, just a dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have
to part with his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he
would break it to them.

The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf s absence. The dining-room was
bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was good, and there was
good wine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to the
Sackville-Bagginses.

’Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get their
claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as
he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.

When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had done
together, they toasted Bilbo's birthday, and they drank his health and
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo's party
was over, and Gandalf had not come.

The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the remainder
of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that is
Fredegar Bolger). 'Someone must get there and warm the house before you
arrive,' said Merry. 'Well, see you later - the day after tomorrow, if you
don't go to sleep on the way!'

Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo was
restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf. He decided
to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him urgently, he
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any
other reason - was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it




fairly easy.

'I shall get myself a bit into training, too,' he said, looking at
himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done any
strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection looked rather flabby,
he thought.

After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son,
Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said Lobelia,
as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of
Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years longer for
Bag End than she once hoped, and she was now a hundred years old.
Anyway,

she had come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and
she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought
a complete inventory with her and went right through it. In the end she
departed with Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key
would be left at the Gamgees' in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed
plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.

He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen. It had
been officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland 'to do for Mr.
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia
as a neighbour.

'Our last meal at Bag End!' said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They
left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up their three
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last stroll in the
garden. Sam disappeared.

The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled.
Frodo

wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light of the sunset fade on
the walls, and shadows creep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark
indoors. He went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the path,
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf
come striding up through the dusk.

The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going to be
a fine night,' he said aloud. 'That's good for a beginning. I feel like




walking. I can't bear any more hanging about. I am going to start, and
Gandalf must follow me.' He turned to go back, and then slopped, for he
heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was
certainly the old Gaffer's; the other was strange, and somehow unpleasant.

He could not make out what it said, but he heard the Gaffer's answers, which
were rather shrill. The old man seemed put out.

'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went
with

him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I tell'ee. Why?
Why's none of my business, or yours. Where to? That ain't no secret. He's
moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is - a tidy
way. I've never been so far myself; they're queer folks in Buckland. No, I
can't give no message. Good night to you!'

Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact
that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief. 'I am sick of
questions and curiosity about my doings, I suppose,' he thought. 'What an
inquisitive lot they all are!' He had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and
walked quickly back to Bag End.

Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo
stepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!'

'Coming, sir!' came the answer from far within, followed soon by Sam
himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer -barrel in
the cellar.

'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo.

'Yes, sir. I'll last for a bit now, sir.'

Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. 'Run
down with this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cut along the Row and meet
us as quick as you can at the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are
not going through the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes
prying.' Sam ran off at full speed.

'Well, now we're off at last!' said Frodo. They shouldered their packs
and took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the west side of
Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He
waved

his hand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known it) hurried
after Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in the




hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a
rustle in the grasses.

At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate
opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the straps of
their packs. Presently Sam appeared, trotting quickly and breathing hard;
his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head
a tall shapeless fell bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom he looked
very much like a dwarf.

'I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,' said Frodo. 'I
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.'

'I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,' said Sam
stoutly and untruthfully.

'No, you don't, Sam!' said Pippin. 'It is good for him. He's got
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.'

'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a
willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense.

I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it
at our next packing.' He picked up his stick again. 'Well, we all like
walking in the dark,' he said, 'so let's put some miles behind us before
bed.'

For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then leaving it they
turned left and took quietly to the fields again. They went in single file
along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them.
In their dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings.

Since they were all hobbits, and were trying to be silent, they made no
noise that even hobbits would hear. Even the wild things in the fields and
woods hardly noticed their passing.

After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow
plank -bridge. The stream was there no more than a winding black ribbon,
bordered with leaning alder -trees. A mile or two further south they hastily
crossed the great road from the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in the
Tookland and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country.
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and saw the lamps
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the gentle valley of the Water. Soon it
disappeared in the folds of the darkened land, and was followed by By water
beside its grey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind,




peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell.

'I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,' he said
quietly.

When they had walked for about three hours they rested. The night was
clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up the
hill-sides from the streams and deep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in
a light wind above their heads, made a black net against the pale sky. They
ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits), and then went on again. Soon they
struck a narrow road, that went rolling up and down, fading grey into the
darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry.
It climbed away from the main road in the Water -valley, and wound over the
skirts of the Green Hills towards Woody-End, a wild corner of the
Eastfarthing.

After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track between tall
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first
they talked, or hummed a tune softly together, being now far away from
inquisitive ears. Then they marched on in silence, and Pippin began to lag
behind. At last, as they began to climb a steep slope, he stopped and
yawned.

'I am so sleepy,' he said, 'that soon I shall fall down on the road.

Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.'

'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is no
great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow; but that
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.'

'The wind's in the West,' said Sam. 'If we get to the other side of
this hill, we shall find a spot that is sheltered and snug enough, sir.

There is a dry fir-wood just ahead, if I remember rightly.' Sam knew the
land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his
geography.

Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of fir-wood.

Leaving the road they went into the deep resin-scented darkness of the
trees, and gathered dead sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a
merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it
for a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the great
tree's roots, they curled up in their cloaks and blankets, and were soon
fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo feared no danger yet, for they
were still in the heart of the Shire. A few creatures came and looked at




them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business
of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed.

'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings
in this land, but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out of doors
under a tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He
was quite right, but he never found out any more about it.

The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that
a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff.

'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't I drive?' he thought, as he usually
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all my beautiful feather beds
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots would do them good.'

He stretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.'

'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering over the edge of his
blanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you
got the bath-water hot?'

Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. 'No, sir, I haven't, sir!' he
said.

Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and then
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out
of the mists that lay thick on the world. Touched with gold and red the
autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared.

When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!'
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?'

'I don't keep water in my pockets,' said Frodo. 'We thought you had
gone to find some,' said Pippin, busy setting out the food, and cups. 'You
had better go now.'

'You can come too,' said Frodo, 'and bring all the water-bottles.'

There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They filled their bottles and
the small camping kettle at a little fall where the water fell a few feet
over an outcrop of grey stone. It was icy cold; and they spluttered and
puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.

When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, it
was after ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They
went down the slope, and across the stream where it dived under the road,
and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by
that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed




a heavy burden.

The day's march promised to be warm and tiring work. After some miles,
however, the road ceased to roll up and down: it climbed to the top of a
steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to go down
for the last time. In front of them they saw the lower lands dotted with
small clumps of trees that melted away in the distance to a brown woodland
haze. They were looking across the Woody End towards the Brandywine
River.

The road wound away before them like a piece of string.

’The road goes on for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest.

It is high time for lunch.' He sat down on the bank at the side of the road
and looked away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round
eyes were wide open - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a
new horizon.

'Do Elves live in those woods?' he asked.

'Not that I ever heard,' said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before. Suddenly
he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:

The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.

Now far ahead the Road has gone,

And I must follow, if I can,

Pursuing it with weary feet,

Until it joins some larger way,

Where many paths and errands meet.

And whither then? I cannot say.

'That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is it
one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.'

'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was making it
up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very much of
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was
only one Road; that it was like a great river: its springs were at every
doorstep, and every path was its tributary. "It's a dangerous business,
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and
if you don't keep your feet, there is no knowing where you might be swept
off to. Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through




Mirkwood, and that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain
or even further and to worse places?" He used to say that on the path
outside the front door at Bag End, especially after he had been out for a
long walk.'

'Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at least,' said
Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example, putting their
packs against the bank and their legs out into the road. After a rest they
had a good lunch, and then more rest.

The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was on the
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road.
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little
traffic to the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour or
more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They were now on level
ground, and the road after much winding lay straight ahead through
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.

'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam.

They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from seeing
far. 'I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as
he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide
from the view of the rider came over him.

'It may not matter much,' he said apologetically, 'but I would rather
not be seen on the road - by anyone. I am sick of my doings being noticed
and discussed. And if it is Gandalf,' he added as an afterthought, 'we can
give him a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out
of sight!'

The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not
far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo hesitated for a second:
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire to hide. The
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots.

Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but a full-sized
horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the saddle,
wrapped in a great black cloak and hood, so that only his boots in the high
stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible.

When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped.

The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From




inside the hood came a noise as of someone sniffing to catch an elusive
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road.

A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and he
thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire to get
it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand.

He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he would be safe. The
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in
the Shire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on which it hung. At
that moment the rider sat up, and shook the reins. The horse stepped
forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot.

Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until he
dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him
that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse turned aside and
went into the trees on the right.

'Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said Frodo to
himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam had remained
flat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and
his strange behaviour.

'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for me;
and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me. I've never
seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.'

'But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?' said Pippin.

'And what is he doing in this part of the world?'

'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they
have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have never heard of
anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes from.'

'Begging your pardon,' put in Sam suddenly, 'I know where he comes
from. It's from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes, unless there's
more than one. And I know where he's going to.'

'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.
'Why didn't you speak up before?'

'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to
our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam!
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a
strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone.
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that Hiked the sound of him. He seemed
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his old home for good.




Hissed at me, he did. It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was
he? says I to the Gaffer. / don 't know, says he; but he wasn 't a hobbit. He
was tall and black-like, and he stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of the
Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny.

'I couldn't stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and I
didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than
a bit blind, and it must have been near dark when this fellow come up the
Hill and found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope he hasn't
done no harm, sir, nor me.'

'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I
heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring for me, and I
nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about
it before. I might have been more careful on the road.'

'Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the Gaffer's
stranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton secretly enough, and I don't see
how he could have followed us.'

'What about the smelling, sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was a
black chap.'

'I wish I had waited for Gandalf,' Frodo muttered. 'But perhaps it
would only have made matters worse.'

'Then you know or guess something about this rider?' said Pippin, who
had caught the muttered words.

'I don't know, and I would rather not guess,' said Frodo. 'All right,
cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present, if you want to be
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a bite and a
sup, but somehow I think we had better move on from here. Your talk of
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.'

'Yes, I think we will move on now,' said Frodo; 'but not on the road
-in case that rider comes back, or another follows him. We ought to do a
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.'

The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they
started off again. They now kept a stone's throw to the left of the road,
and kept out of sight of it as much as they could. But this hindered them;
for the grass was thick and tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the trees
began to draw together into thickets.

The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and evening
was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level




over which it had run straight for some miles. At that point it bent left
and went down into the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lane
branched right, winding through a wood of ancient oak-trees on its way to
Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo.

Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a tree: it
was still alive and had leaves on the small branches that it had put out
round the broken stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it was hollow, and
could be entered by a great crack on the side away from the road. The
hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a floor of old leaves and decayed
wood. They rested and had a light meal, talking quietly and listening from
time to time.

Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the road began to
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out above the trees in
the darkening East before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep up
their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and brighter, the
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened for the sound of
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk
along, especially when they are drawing near to home at night. With most
hobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed).
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as the hills,
and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water -valley and
talked about Adventure.

Upon the hearth the fire is red,

Beneath the roof there is a bed;

But not yet weary are our feet,

Still round the corner we may meet
A sudden tree or standing stone
That none have seen but we alone.

Tree and flower and leaf and grass,

Let them pass! Let them pass!

Hill and water under sky,

Pass them by! Pass them by!



Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate,




And though we pass them by today,

Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.

Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,

Let them go! Let them go!

Sand and stone and pool and dell,

Fare you well! Fare you well!

Home is behind, the world ahead,

And there are many paths to tread
Through shadows to the edge of night,

Until the stars are all alight.

Then world behind and home ahead,

We'll wander back to home and bed.

Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,

Away shall fade! Away shall fade!

Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,

And then to bed! And then to bed!

The song ended. 'And now to bed! And now to bed!' sang Pippin in a high
voice.

'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.'

They slopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening.

There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow and
clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and ran
into the deeper shade under the oak-trees.

'Don't let us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I
want to see if it is another Black Rider.'

'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!'

The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better
than the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a
large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It
showed grey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Above it the
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.

The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass
across the lighter space between two trees, and then halt. It looked like
the black shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow. The black shadow




stood close to the point where they had left the path, and it swayed from
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. The shadow bent
to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him.

Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time
it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he realized what
he was doing, his hand was groping in his pocket. But at that moment there
came a sound like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated. It climbed
on to the shadowy horse and seemed to vanish across the lane into the
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again.

'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would have
burst out of the trees and dashed off towards the voices, if they had not
pulled him back.

'Yes, it is Elves,' said Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes in the
Woody End. They don't live in the Shire, but they wander into it in Spring
and Autumn, out of their own lands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am
thankful that they do! You did not see, but that Black Rider stopped just
here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he
heard the voices he slipped away.'

'What about the Elves?' said Sam, too excited to trouble about the
rider. 'Can't we go and see them?'

'Listen! They are coming this way,' said Frodo. 'We have only to wait.'

The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the others. It was
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the
others knew nothing. Yet the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape
itself in their thought into words which they only partly understood. This
was the song as Frodo heard it:



Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!
O Queen beyond the Western Seas!

O Light to us that wander here



Amid the world of woven trees!



Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!

Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee
In a far land beyond the Sea.




O stars that in the Sunless Year

With shining hand by her were sawn,

In windy fields now bright and clear

We see your silver blossom blown!

O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!

We still remember, we who dwell

In this far land beneath the trees,

Thy starlight on the Western Seas.

The song ended. These are High Elves! They spoke the name of
Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement, 'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea.
This is indeed a strange chance!'

The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the Elves came
down the lane towards the valley. They passed slowly, and the hobbits could
see the starlight glimmering on their hair and in their eyes. They bore no
lights, yet as they walked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the
rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were
now silent, and as the last Elf passed he turned and looked towards the
hobbits and laughed.

'Hail, Frodo!' he cried. 'You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps
lost?' Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped and
gathered round.

'This is indeed wonderful!' they said. 'Three hobbits in a wood at
night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What is the
meaning of it?'

'The meaning of it, fair people,' said Frodo, 'is simply that we seem
to be going the same way as you are. I like walking under the stars. But I
would welcome your company.'

'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are so dull,' they
laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do
not

know whither we are going?'

'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return.

'We know many things,' they said. 'We have seen you often before with
Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.'

'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo.




'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him.

'Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of our
kindred have long ago departed and we too are now only tarrying here a
while, ere we return over the Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell
still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing?

For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.'

'O Wise People!' interrupted Pippin eagerly. ’Tell us about the Black
Riders!'

'Black Riders?' they said in low voices. 'Why do you ask about Black
Riders?'

'Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one has done so
twice,' said Pippin; 'only a little while ago he slipped away as you drew
near.'

The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly in their
own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. 'We will not speak of
this here,' he said. 'We think you had best come now with us. It is not our
custom, but for this time we will lake you on our road, and you shall lodge
with us tonight, if you will.'

'O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,' said Pippin. Sam
was speechless. 'I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing.
'Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he
added in the high-elven speech.

'Be careful, friends!' cried Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here
is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail,
Elf-friend!' he said, bowing to Frodo. 'Come now with your friends and join
our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You
may be weary before we halt.'

'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo.

'For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It is some
miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it, and it will shorten your
journey tomorrow.'

They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint
lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when they wished
without sound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered
once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and
saved him from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a dream,
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished joy.




The woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and
thicker; and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills,
there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At
last the Elves turned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseen
through the thickets on the right; and this they followed as it wound away
back up the wooded slopes on to the top of a shoulder of the hills that
stood out into the lower land of the river -valley. Suddenly they came out of
the shadow of the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass, grey
under the night. On three sides the woods pressed upon it; but eastward the
ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of
the slope, were below their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and flat
under the stars. Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of
Woodhall.

The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; they
seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his companions
wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole over them.
The night grew on, and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.

Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars, and slowly
above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some
shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned up,
as he climbed over the rim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky,
Menelvagor with his shining belt. The Elves all burst into song. Suddenly
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light.

'Come!' the Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come! Now is the time for
speech and merriment!'

Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in the
hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him.

At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. There the
green floor ran on into the wood, and formed a wide space like a hall,
roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each
side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily. The Elves sat
round the fire upon the grass or upon the sawn rings of old trunks. Some
went to and fro bearing cups and pouring drink; others brought food on
heaped plates and dishes.

'This is poor fare,' they said to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in




the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you are our guests at home, we
will treat you better.'

'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo.

Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for his mind
was filled with the light upon the elf-faces, and the sound of voices so
various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking dream. But he remembered
that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who
is starving; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended
fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught,
cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon.

Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what
he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory as one of
the chief events of his life. The nearest he ever got was to say: 'Well,
sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But
it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.'

Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was
chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in
their own language. They smiled at him and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel
among hobbits!'

After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and slept the
rest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master. When Pippin had
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor.

They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned Gildor
much about happenings in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were
mostly sad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to
his heart:

'Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?'

Gildor smiled. 'Yes,' he answered. 'Twice. He said farewell to us on
this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.' He would say no
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.

'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said
Gildor. 'But I already know a little, and I can read more in your face and
in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you




doubt that you will find what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or
that you will ever return. Is not that so?'

'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to
Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring
gently.

'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor.

'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?'

'I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you,' answered
Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is - strange indeed though that seems to me.

And I warn you that peril is now both before you and behind you, and upon
either side.'

'You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the Enemy.
What are the Black Riders?'

'Has Gandalf told you nothing?'

'Nothing about such creatures.'

'Then I think it is not for me to say more - lest terror should keep
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only just in
time, if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and neither stay
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.'

'I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying than your
hints and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew that danger lay ahead, of
course; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire. Can't a hobbit
walk from the Water to the River in peace?'

'But it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The
wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for
ever fence it out.'

'I know - and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can I
do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, and make my way to
Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.'

'I think you should still follow that plan,' said Gildor. 'I do not
think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But if you desire
clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason for your
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your pursuers will assail
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see him before
you leave the Shire?'

'I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. I have




been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at
the

latest two nights ago; but he has never appeared. Now I am wondering what
can have happened. Should I wait for him?’

Gildor was silent for a moment. 'I do not like this news,' he said at
last. 'That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is said: Do
not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to
anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.'

'And it is also said,' answered Frodo: 'Go not to the Elves for
counsel, for they will say both no and yes. '

'Is it indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves seldom give unguarded advice,
for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise, and all
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning
yourself; and how then shall I choose better than you? But if you demand
advice, I will for friendship's sake give it. I think you should now go at
once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I
also advise this: do not go alone. Take such friends as are trusty and
willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly.

The Elves have their own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little
concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth.

Our paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there
may be more than chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to
say too much.'

'I am deeply grateful,' said Frodo; 'but I wish you would tell me
plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger that
pursues me.'

'Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?'
answered Gildor. 'Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no
more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of
Drogo, will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May
Elbereth protect you!'

'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I chiefly
need.'

'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said Gildor. 'Be of good hope!

Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will send our messages




through the lands. The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey,
and

those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend;
and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldom have we had such
delight in strangers, and it is fair to hear words of the Ancient Speech
from the lips of other wanderers in the world.'

Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor finished speaking. 'I
will sleep now,' he said; and the Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber.




Chapter 4 . A Short Cut to Mushrooms



In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bower made by a
living tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground; his bed was of
fern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The sun was shining
through the fluttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. He
jumped up and went out.

Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin was
standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.

'They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come and
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I
did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.'

Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. 'What is the plan for
today?' asked Pippin.

'To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,' answered Frodo, and
gave his attention to the food.

'Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?' asked Pippin
cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of
them did not seem very alarming to him.

'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking the reminder. 'But I hope to
get across the river without their seeing us.'

'Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?'

'Not much - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask
about the sniffing?'

'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full.

'You should have. I am sure it is very important.'

'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain it,' said
Frodo sharply. 'And now leave me in peace for a bit! I don't want to answer
a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!'

'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards the
edge of the green.

From Frodo' s mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought
- had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor.
The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running on the green turf and
singing.




'No! I could not!' he said to himself. 'It is one thing to take my
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary,
and food and bed are sweet. To take them into exile, where hunger and
weariness may have no cure, is quite another - even if they are willing to
come. The inheritance is mine alone. I don't think I ought even to take
Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him.

'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as
ever I can - in fact I have made up my mind now not even to wait a day at
Crickhollow, if it can be helped.'

'Very good, sir!'

'You still mean to come with me?'

'I do.'

'It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most
likely neither of us will come back.'

'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam.

'Don't you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I
am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon, and if any of those Black
Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They
laughed.'

'Who are they, and what are you talking about?'

'The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemed to know
you were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying it. Wonderful folk,
Elves, sir! Wonderful!'

'They are,' said Frodo. 'Do you like them still, now you have had a
closer view?'

'They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,' answered
Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it
were.'

Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward
sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him. It did not sound
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked
like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusually
thoughtful.

'Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now - now that your wish to
see them has come true already?' he asked.

'Yes, sir. I don't know how to say it, but after last night I feel




different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going to
take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It isn't
to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want - 1 don't rightly
know what I want: but I have something to do before the end, and it lies
ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.'

'I don't altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a good
companion. I am content. We will go together.'

Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.

'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting off
at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.'

'You slept late, you mean,' said Pippin. 'I was up long before; and we
are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.'

'I have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry
as quickly as possible. I am not going out of the way, back to the road we
left last night: I am going to cut straight across country from here.'

'Then you are going to fly,' said Pippin. 'You won't cut straight on
foot anywhere in this country.'

'We can cut straighter than the road anyway,' answered Frodo. 'The
Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard road curves away to the left -you
can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round the north end of
the Marish so as to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock. But
that is miles out of the way. We could save a quarter of the distance if we
made a line for the Ferry from where we stand.'

'Short cuts make long delays, ' argued Pippin. 'The country is rough
round here, and there are bogs and all kinds of difficulties down in the
Marish -I know the land in these parts. And if you are worrying about Black
Riders, I can't see that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in a
wood or a field.'

'It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields,' answered
Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that
you will be looked for on the road and not off it.'

'All right!' said Pippin. 'I will follow you into every bog and ditch.

But it is hard! I had counted on passing the Golden Perch at Stock before
sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long time
since I tasted it.'

'That settles it!' said Frodo. 'Short cuts make delays, but inns make




longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away from the Golden Perch. We
want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?'

'I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of private
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).

Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let's go now!'
said Pippin.

It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds
were beginning to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain.

The hobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and plunged into the thick
trees below. Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their left,
and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side
of the hills, until they reached the flats beyond. Then they could make
straight for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.

He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it had
appeared. There were no paths in the undergrowth, and they did not get on
very fast. When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a
stream running down from the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with steep
slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the
line they had chosen. They could not jump over it, nor indeed get across it
at all without getting wet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering
what to do. 'First check!' said Pippin, smiling grimly.

Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he caught a
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down.

'Look!' he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and on
the edge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing. Beside
it stooped a black figure.

They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way, and
plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but we
got under cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear
anything coming?'

They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but
there was no sound of pursuit. 'I don't fancy he would try bringing his
horse down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he knows we came down it. We
had better be going on.'

Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry, and the




bushes and brambles were reluctant to let them through. They were cut off
from the wind by the ridge behind, and the air was still and stuffy. When
they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired
and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in
which they were going. The banks of the stream sank, as it reached the
levels and became broader and shallower, wandering off towards the Marish
and the River.

’Why, this is the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try
and get back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.'

They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown
and treeless, on the further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of
trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here and there an elm tree or an
ash. The ground was fairly level, and there was little undergrowth; but the
trees were loo close for them to see far ahead. The leaves blew upwards in
sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky.
Then the wind died away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged
along

as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through thick drifts of
old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and trickled. They did not
talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side.

After half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope we have not turned too much
towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this wood! It is not
a very broad belt —I should have said no more than a mile at the widest -
and we ought to have been through it by now.'

'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't
mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! I am not sure that I want to
come out into the open yet.'

They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamed
out of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened. It was now past mid-day,
and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its
leaves though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the ground at its
feel was fairly dry and sheltered. When they came to make their meal, they
found that the Elves had filled their bottles with a clear drink, pale
golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made of many flowers, and was
wonderfully refreshing. Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their
fingers at rain, and at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, would
soon be behind them.




Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly:

Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go

To heal my heart and drown my woe.

Rain may fall and wind may blow,

And many miles be still to go,

But under a tall tree I will lie,

And let the clouds go sailing by.

Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind, like the cry of
some evil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and ended on a high
piercing note. Even as they sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was
answered by another cry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in
the leaves.

'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak
lightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was one that I never
heard in the Shire before.'

'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or a signal —
there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no hobbit
has such a voice.'

No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no
one spoke of them. They were now reluctant either to stay or go on; but
sooner or later they had got to get across the open country to the Ferry,
and it was best to go sooner and in daylight. In a few moments they had
shouldered their packs again and were off.

Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched
before them. They now saw that they had, in fact, turned too much to the
south. Away over the flats they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury
across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from
the edge of the trees, they set off across the open as quickly as they
could.

At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood. Far back
behind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted. Frodo half
expected to see the small distant figure of a horseman on the ridge dark
against the sky; but there was no sign of one. The sun escaping from the
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining




brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the
land became steadily more tame and well-ordered. Soon they came into
well-tended fields and meadows: there were hedges and gates and dikes for
drainage. Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinary corner of
the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The line of the River grew
nearer; and the Black Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now
left far behind.

They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and came to a stout
gate. Beyond it a rutted lane ran between low well-laid hedges towards a
distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped.

'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong, old
Farmer Maggot's land. That's his farm away there in the trees.'

'One trouble after another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed
as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon's den.

The others looked at him in surprise.

'What's wrong with old Maggot?' asked Pippin. 'He's a good friend to
all the Brandy bucks. Of course he's a terror to trespassers, and keeps
ferocious dogs - but after all, folk down here are near the border and have
to be more on their guard.'

'I know,' said Frodo. 'But all the same,' he added with a shamefaced
laugh, 'I am terrified of him and his dogs. I have avoided his farm for
years and years. He caught me several times trespassing after mushrooms,
when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and
then took me and showed me to his dogs. "See, lads," he said, "next time
this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat him. Now see him off!"
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the fright -
though I daresay the beasts knew their business and would not really have
touched me.'

Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you made it up. Especially if you are
coming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is really a stout fellow - if
you leave his mushrooms alone. Fet's get into the lane and then we shan't be
trespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's,
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.'

They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs of a large
house and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead. The Maggots,
and

the Puddifoots of Stock, and most of the inhabitants of the Marish, were




house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the wall into the
lane.

Suddenly as they drew nearer a terrific baying and barking broke out,
and a loud voice was heard shouting: ’Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!'

Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces. The gate
opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane, and dashed
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but
Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling.

Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick -set hobbit with a
round red face. 'Hallo! Hallo! And who may you be, and what may you be
wanting?' he asked.

'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin.

The farmer looked at him closely. 'Well, if it isn't Master Pippin -
Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin.
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know
you. I was just going out to set my dogs on any strangers. There are some
funny things going on today. Of course, we do get queer folk wandering in
these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his head. 'But
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes on. He won't cross
my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.'

'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin.

'Then you haven't seen him?' said the farmer. 'He went up the lane
towards the causeway not a long while back. He was a funny customer and
asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass
the news more comfortable. I've a drop of good ale on tap, if you and your
friends are willing, Mr. Took.'

It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do
it in his own time and fashion, so they all accepted the invitation. 'What
about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously.

The farmer laughed. 'They won't harm you - not unless I tell 'em to.

Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!' To the relief of Frodo and
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.

Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' he
said. 'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At the




name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment
Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and
that

the dogs would be told to see him off. But Farmer Maggot took him by the
arm.

'Well, if that isn't queerer than ever?' he exclaimed. 'Mr. Baggins is
it? Come inside! We must have a talk.'

They went into the farmer's kitchen, and sat by the wide fire-place.

Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, and filled four large mugs. It
was a good brew, and Pippin found himself more than compensated for
missing

the Golden Perch. Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not
disposed to be quick friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however
long ago.

After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural prospects
(which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his mug and
looked

at them all in turn.

'Now, Mr. Peregrin,' he said, 'where might you be coming from, and
where might you be going to? Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you
had gone past my gate without my seeing you.'

'Well, no,' answered Pippin. 'To tell you the truth, since you have
guessed it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come over your
fields. But that was quite by accident. We lost our way in the woods, back
near Woodhall, trying to take a short cut to the Ferry.'

'If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better,' said
the farmer. 'But I wasn't worrying about that. You have leave to walk over
my land, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins - though I
daresay you still like mushrooms.' He laughed. 'Ah yes, I recognized the
name. I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was one of the worst
young rascals of Buckland. But it wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had
just heard the name Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that
funny customer asked me?'

They waited anxiously for him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued,
approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horse
in at the gate, which happened to be open, and right up to my door. All




black he was himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want
to be known. "Now what in the Shire can he want?" I thought to myself. We
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard
of any like this black fellow.

' "Good-day to you!" I says, going out to him. "This lane don’t lead
anywhere, and wherever you may be going, your quickest way will be back to
the road." I didn't like the looks of him; and when Grip came out, he took
one sniff and let out a yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail
and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still.

' "I come from yonder," he said, slow and stiff-like, pointing back
west, over my fields, if you please. "Have you seen Baggins? " he asked in a
queer voice, and bent down towards me. I could not see any face, for his
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back. But I did
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold.

' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses here. You're in the wrong
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton - but you can go
by road this time."

' "Baggins has left," he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He is
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come
back with gold."

' "No you won't," I said. "You'll go back where you belong, double
quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs."

'He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not.

Then he spurred his great horse right at me, and I jumped out of the way
only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the
gate and up the lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder. What do
you think of that?'

Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire, but his only thought was
how on earth would they reach the Ferry. 'I don't know what to think,' he
said at last.

'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have
gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk are queer up
there.' Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer with an
unfriendly eye. 'But you were always a reckless lad. When I heard you had
left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of those strange
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign




parts, they say. Maybe there is some that want to know what has become of
the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?'

Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather
disconcerting.

'Well, Mr. Frodo,' Maggot went on, 'I'm glad that you've had the sense
to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don't get mixed up
with these outlandish folk. You'll have friends in these parts. If any of
these black fellows come after you again, I'll deal with them. I'll say
you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.'

'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring
at the fire.

Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see you have ideas of your
own,' he said. 'It is as plain as my nose that no accident brought you and
that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my news was no great news
to you, after all. I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mind
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind of trouble. Perhaps you
are thinking it won't be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught?'

'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. But we have got to try and get there;
and it won't be done by sitting and thinking. Sol am afraid we must be
going. Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of
you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh
to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to
leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day - if I get a chance.'

'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion.
It's near sundown already, and we are going to have our supper; for we
mostly go to bed soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and all could
stay and have a bite with us, we would be pleased!'

'And so should we!' said Frodo. 'But we must be going at once, I'm
afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.'

'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'll
gel out a small waggon, and I'll drive you all to the Ferry. That will save
you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.'

Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin
and Sam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light was
failing. Two of Maggot's sons and his three daughters came in, and a
generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was lit with




candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot hustled in and out. One or two
other hobbits belonging to the farm-household came in. In a short while
fourteen sat down to eat. There was beer in plenty, and a mighty dish of
mushrooms and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones.

When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern
and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out.
They threw their packs on board and climbed in. The farmer sat in the
driving-seat, and whipped up his two stout ponies. His wife stood in the
light of the open door.

'You be careful of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't go arguing
with any foreigners, and come straight back!'

'I will!' said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now no breath
of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air.

They went without lights and took it slowly. After a mile or two the lane
came to an end, crossing a deep dike, and climbing a short slope up on to
the high-banked causeway.

Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and south, but
nothing could be seen in the darkness, and there was not a sound in the
still air. Thin strands of river -mist were hanging above the dikes, and
crawling over the fields.

'It's going to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but I'll not light my lantern
till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it
tonight.'

It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The hobbits
wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the
creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies' hoofs. The waggon
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was nodding towards
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog.

They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked by
two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on their right. Farmer Maggot
drew in his ponies and the waggon creaked to a halt. They were just
beginning lo scramble out, when suddenly they heard what they had all been
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them.

Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies' heads, and peering
forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approaching rider. The
fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air.




'You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. 'You get down
in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we'll send this rider to the
rightabouts!' He climbed out and went to the farmer's side. Black Riders
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.

Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them.

'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.
They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard
or two ahead. 'Now then!' said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and
striding forward. 'Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where
are you going?'

'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' said a muffled voice - but the
voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A dark lantern was uncovered, and
its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer.

'Mr. Merry!' he cried.

'Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward.

As he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly to
diminish to ordinary hobbit-size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was
swathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog.

Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. 'So there you are at
last!' said Merry. 'I was beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all
today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across
and rode up towards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches. But I'm
blest if I know which way you have come. Where did you find them, Mr.
Maggot? In your duck-pond?'

'No, I caught 'em trespassing,' said the farmer, 'and nearly set my
dogs on 'em; but they'll tell you all the story, I've no doubt. Now, if
you'll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all, I'd best be turning for
home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.'

He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good night to
you all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well as
ends well; though perhaps we should not say that until we reach our own
doors. I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I do.' He lit his lanterns,
and got up. Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. 'I was
nearly forgetting,' he said. 'Mrs. Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins, with
her compliments.' He handed it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of
thanks and good-nights.

They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as they




dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: from the covered
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.




Chapter 5 . A Conspiracy Unmasked



'Now we had better get home ourselves,' said Merry. There's something
funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.'

They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept and
edged with large white- washed stones. In a hundred yards or so it brought
them to the river -bank, where there was a broad wooden landing-stage. A
large flat ferry-boat was moored beside it. The white bollards near the
water's edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind them
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before
them was dark, with only a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by
the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side.

Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and the others
followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long pole. The Brandywine
flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and
up it a winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling
there. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds
of mist, shone many round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows
of

Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandy bucks.

Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one of the
oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed the river, which
was the original boundary of the land eastwards. He built (and excavated)
Brandy Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck, and settled down to become
master of what was virtually a small independent country. His family grew
and grew, and after his days continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied
the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,
and about a hundred windows. The Brandybucks and their numerous
dependants

then began to burrow, and later to build, all round about. That was the
origin of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old
Forest, a sort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village was Bucklebury,
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall.

The people in the Marish were friendly with the Bucklanders, and the
authority of the Master of the Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck family




was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey.
But most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar,
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter of fact, they were not very
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point:
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim.

Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but on that side
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been planted many generations
ago, and was now thick and tail, for it was constantly tended. It ran all
the way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from the river,
to Haysend (where the Withywindle flowed out of the Forest into the
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to end. But, of course, it was
not a complete protection. The Forest drew close to the hedge in many
places. The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after dark, and that also
was not usual in the Shire.

The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore drew
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his
old life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone
on living quietly at Bag End.

The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it up, and
Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (who had been
looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:

'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?'

On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just make out a
figure: it looked like a dark black bundle left behind. But as they looked
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It
then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.

'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry.

'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask any more
now! Let's get away at once!' They hurried up the path to the top of the
bank, but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded in mist, and
nothing could be seen.

'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!' said Frodo.
'Can horses cross the river?'

'They can go twenty miles north to Brandywine Bridge - or they might
swim,' answered Merry. 'Though I never heard of any horse swimming the




Brandywine. But what have horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let's
get indoors and then we can talk.'

'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell
Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.'

'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo; 'but we could
do with another.'

'You shall have it! Give me that basket!' said Merry, and rode ahead
into the darkness.

It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo's new house at
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the
outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from
the Bridge. Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane opening on
their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it climbed up and
down into the country.

At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be
seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of
a wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees inside the outer
hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of
the country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You could get in
and out without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the
Brandybucks, for the use of guests, or members of the family that wished to
escape from the crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an
old-fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it
was long and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round
windows, and a large round door.

As they walked lip the green path from the gate no light was visible;
the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty
Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on
either side; in front of them a passage ran back down the middle of the
house.

'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We
have done our best in a short time to make it look like home. After all
Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.'

Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own favourite
things - or Bilbo's things (they reminded him sharply of him in their new
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been at Bag End.




It was a pleasant, comfortable, welcoming place; and he found himself
wishing that he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retirement.

It seemed unfair to have put his friends to all this trouble; and he
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave
them so soon, indeed at once. Yet that would have to be done that very
night, before they all went to bed.

'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I hardly feel that I have
moved at all.'

The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on the
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end.
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.

'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!'

'Which order shall we go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest first, or quickest
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.'

'Trust me to arrange things better than that!' said Merry. 'We can't
begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are
three tubs, and a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats
and soap. Get inside, and be quick!'

Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage,
and busied themselves with the final preparations for a late supper.
Snatches of competing songs came from the bathroom mixed with the sound
of

splashing and wallowing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs.

Sing hey! for the bath at close of day
that washes the weary mud away!

A loon is he that will not sing:

O! Water Hot is a noble thing!

O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.

O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;
but better is Beer, if drink we lack,




and Water Hot poured down the back.



O! Water is fair that leaps on high

in a fountain white beneath the sky;

but never did fountain sound so sweet

as splashing Hot Water with my feet!

There was a terrific splash, and a shout of Whoa! from Frodo. It
appeared that a lot of Pippin's bath had imitated a fountain and leaped on
high.

Merry went to the door: 'What about supper and beer in the throat?' he
called. Frodo came out drying his hair.

'There's so much water in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen to
finish,' he said.

'Lawks!' said Merry, looking in. The stone floor was swimming. 'You
ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said.
'Hurry up, or we shan't wait for you.'

They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope.

'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin.

'They're mine!' said Frodo. 'Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.'

Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the greediest
likings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young Frodo's long
expeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish, and the wrath of the
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they
had finished even Fatty Bolger heaved a sigh of content. They pushed back
the table, and drew chairs round the fire.

'We'll clear up later,' said Merry. 'Now tell me all about it! I guess
that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with
old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was
scared, if that is possible.'

'We have all been scared,' said Pippin after a pause, in which Frodo
stared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been, too, if you had
been chased for two days by Black Riders.'

'And what are they?'




'Black figures riding on black horses,' answered Pippin. 'If Frodo
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave
a full account of their journey from the time when they left Hobbiton. Sam
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.

'I should think you were making it all up,' said Merry, 'if I had not
seen that black shape on the landing-stage - and heard the queer sound in
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?'

'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come
for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more to go on than
Farmer Maggot's guess that it has something to do with old Bilbo's
treasure.'

'That was only a guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does not know
anything.'

'Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good
many strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think
his guess good or bad.'

'I think, ' answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as far as
it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo's old adventures, and the Riders
are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or for me. I
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not
safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if
he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The others looked at him in
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves.

'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded.

'Well!' said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as
if he had made a decision. 'I can't keep it dark any longer. I have got
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.'

'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of
it myself.'

'What do you mean?' said Frodo, looking at him anxiously. 'Just this,
my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don't know how to say
good-bye. You meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come on
you sooner than you expected, and now you are making up your mind to go at
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.'

Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise was so




comical that they laughed. 'Dear old Frodo!' said Pippin. 'Did you really
think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying
farewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have constantly
heard you muttering: "Shall I ever look down into that valley again, I
wonder", and things like that. And pretending that you had come to the end
of your money, and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.'

'Good heavens!' said Frodo. 'I thought I had been both careful and
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire discussing my
departure then?'

'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for
long, of course; but at present it is, I think, only known to us
conspirators. After all, you must remember that we know you well, and are
often with you. We can usually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo,
too. To tell you the truth, I had been watching you rather closely ever
since he left. I thought you would go after him sooner or later; indeed I
expected you to go sooner, and lately we have been very anxious. We have
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape
so easily!'

'But I must go,' said Frodo. 'It cannot be helped, dear friends. It is
wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!'

'You do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You must go - and therefore we
must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow, and
would jump down a dragon's throat to save you, if he did not trip over his
own feet; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous
adventure.'

'My dear and most beloved hobbits!' said Frodo deeply moved. 'But I
could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too. You speak of danger, but
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-and -back journey.

I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.'

'Of course we understand,' said Merry firmly. 'That is why we have
decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing -matter; but we are going to
do our best to help you against the Enemy.'




The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed.

'Yes, the Ring,' said Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't allow for
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring
for years - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded
it as secret, I kept the knowledge in my head, until we formed our
conspiracy. I did not know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was
too young, and he was also more careful - but he was not careful enough. If
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.'

'Go on!' said Frodo faintly.

'It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you might
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the
road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared,
coming towards us. Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he vanished. I
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary
fashion; but I got through the hedge and walked along the field inside. I
was peeping through into the road, after the S.-B.s had passed, and was
looking straight at Bilbo when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of
gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket.

'After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my teens. I
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the
old fellow's secret book.'

'You have read his book!' cried Frodo. 'Good heavens above! Is nothing
safe?'

'Not too safe, I should say,' said Merry. 'But I have only had one
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I
wonder what became of it. I should like another look. Have you got it,
Frodo?'

'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.'

'Well, as I was saying,' Merry proceeded, 'I kept my knowledge to
myself, till this Spring when things got serious. Then we formed our
conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and meant business, we have not
been too scrupulous. You are not a very easy nut to crack, and Gandalf is
worse. But if you want to be introduced to our chief investigator, I can
produce him.'

'Where is he?' said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a masked
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard.




’Step forward, Sam!' said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face scarlet
up to the ears. 'Here's our collector of information ! And he collected a
lot, I can tell you, before he was finally caught. After which, I may say,
he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.'

'Sam!' cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and
quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved, or merely
foolish.

'Yes, sir!' said Sam. 'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no wrong
to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He has some sense,
mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no! lake someone as you can
trust. '

'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo. Sam looked
at him unhappily. 'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you
can trust us to keep any secret of yours - closer than you keep it yourself.

But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a
word. We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what
Gandalf has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.'

'And after all, sir,' added Sam, 'you did ought to take the Elves'
advice. Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't deny
it.'

'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I
don't deny it, but I'll never believe you are sleeping again, whether you
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.

'You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!' he said, turning to the
others. 'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give
in. I will take Gildor's advice. If the danger were not so dark, I should
dance for joy. Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier than I have
felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.'

'Good! That's settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company!'
they shouted; and they danced round him. Merry and Pippin began a song,
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion.

It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on his
adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:

Farewell we call to hearth and hall!

Though wind may blow and rain may fall,




We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.



To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,

Through moor and waste we ride in haste,

And whither then we cannot tell.

With foes ahead, behind us dread,

Beneath the sky shall be our bed,

Until at last our toil be passed,

Our journey done, our errand sped.

We must away! We must away!

We ride before the break of day!

'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for tonight at any rate.'

'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before
the break of day?'

'I don't know,' answered Frodo. 'I fear those Black Riders, and I am
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place to which
it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should
very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed
when he heard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on two
things. Flow soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could
we

get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.'

'The answer to the second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except for
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.'

'It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?'

'That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they found
you here,' answered Merry. 'They could have reached here by now, of course,
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the
river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them




through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they
would try to keep them out, I think, at any rate until they got a message
through to the Master of the Hall - for they would not like the look of the
Riders, and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland
cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in the
morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr. Baggins would be
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back to live
at Crickhollow.'

Frodo sat for a while in thought. 'I have made up my mind,' he said
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going
by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go through the
North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known at once, instead of
being secret for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more,
the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly be watched,
whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We don't know how many there
are; but there are at least two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is
to go off in a quite unexpected direction.'

'But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!' said Fredegar
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as
Black Riders.'

'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very desperate, but I believe Frodo
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed at once.

With luck we might gel a considerable start.'

'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.'

'Oh yes they do!' said Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in - occasionally
when the fit takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went in once,
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.'

'Well, do as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of the
Old Forest than of anything I know about: the stories about it are a
nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on the journey.

Still, I am very glad someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.'

Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire,
nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine




Bridge. His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, was
to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keep up as long as
possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was still living at Crickhollow. He
had even brought along some old clothes of Frodo's to help him in playing
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove.

'Excellent!' said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ’We could not
have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don't know whether
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk
a written message, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we
have gone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing
tomorrow.’

'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.'

'You wait till you are well inside the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.'

'It's no good arguing about it any more,' said Merry. 'We have still
got to tidy up and put the finishing touches to the packing, before we get
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.'

When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some time.

His legs ached. He. was glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually
he fell into a vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking out of a high
window over a dark sea of tangled trees. Down below among the roots there
was the sound of creatures crawling and snuffling. He felt sure they would
smell him out sooner or later.

Then he heard a noise in the distance. At first he thought it was a
great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that it was
not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in
waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on a dark heath,
and there was a strange salt smell in the air. Looking up he saw before him
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge
towards the tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a
noise of thunder.




Chapter 6. The Old Forest



Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standing
there with a candle in one hand, and banging on the door with the other.

'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.

'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is time to get up. It is half past four
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin
is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be
the baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and
see us off.'

Soon after six o'clock the five hobbits were ready to start. Fatty
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in
front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that went through
a spinney behind the house, and then cut across several fields. The leaves
of trees were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass was grey
with cold dew. Everything was still, and far-away noises seemed near and
clear: fowls chattering in a yard, someone closing a door of a distant
house.

In their shed they found the ponies; sturdy little beasts of the kind
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day's work. They mounted,
and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed to open
reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for
about an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Fledge looming
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with silver cobwebs. 'How are
you going to get through this?' asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry,

'and you will see.' He turned to the left along the Hedge, and soon they
came to a point where it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A
cutting had been made, at some distance from the Hedge, and went sloping
gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at the sides, which rose
steadily, until suddenly they arched over and formed a tunnel that dived
deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side.

Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he said. 'I wish you were
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!'

'If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be
lucky,' said Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall




soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.’ ’Good-bye!' they cried, and
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel.

It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a gate of
thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had
all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock
clicked. The sound was ominous.

’There!’ said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and
on the edge of the Old Forest.'

'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin.

'I don't know what stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses used to tell him, about goblins and wolves
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I don't believe them.

But the Forest is queer. Everything in it is very much more alive, more
aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are in the Shire. And
the trees do not like strangers. They watch you. They are usually content
merely to watch you, as long as daylight lasts, and don't do much.
Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root
out, or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can be most
alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twice been in here after
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the trees were whispering
to each other, passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language;
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They do say the trees
do actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In fact long
ago they attacked the Hedge: they came and planted themselves right by it,
and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and
made a great bonfire in the Forest, and burned all the ground in a long
strip east of the Hedge. After that the trees gave up the attack, but they
became very unfriendly. There is still a wide bare space not far inside
where the bonfire was made.'

'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin.

'There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, and on the
far side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never seen
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever one comes inside one
finds

open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time to time in a queer
fashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or was for a long time, the
beginning of quite a broad path leading to the Bonfire Glade, and then on




more or less in our direction, east and a little north. That is the path I
am going to try and find.’

The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide hollow.

On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a
hundred yards and more beyond the Hedge; but it vanished as soon as it
brought them under the trees. Looking back they could see the dark line of
the Hedge through the stems of trees that were already thick about them.
Looking ahead they could see only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes and
shapes: straight or bent, twisted, leaning, squat or slender, smooth or
gnarled and branched; and all the stems were green or grey with moss and
slimy, shaggy growths.

Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. 'You had better lead on and find
that path,' Frodo said to him. 'Don't let us lose one another, or forget
which way the Hedge lies!'

They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies plodded along,
carefully avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots. There was no
undergrowth. The ground was rising steadily, and as they went forward it
seemed that the trees became taller, darker, and thicker. There was no
sound, except an occasional drip of moisture falling through the still
leaves. For the moment there was no whispering or movement among the
branches; but they all got an uncomfortable feeling that they were being
watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. The feeling
steadily grew, until they found themselves looking up quickly, or glancing
back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.

There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees seemed
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt that he could not bear it
any longer, and without warning let out a shout. 'Oi! Oi !' he cried. 'I am
not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!'

The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if muffled by a heavy
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood seemed to become
more

crowded and more watchful than before.

'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than
good.'

Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and if
he had been right to make the others come into this abominable wood. Merry
was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go.




Pippin noticed it. 'It has not taken you long to lose us,' he said. But at
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead.

'Well, well!' he said. 'These trees do shift. There is the Bonfire
Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved
away!'

The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they came out of
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above
them, blue and clear to their surprise, for down under the Forest -roof they
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The
sun was not, however, high enough yet to shine down into the clearing,
though its light was on the tree-tops. The leaves were all thicker and
greener about the edges of the glade, enclosing it with an almost solid
wall. No tree grew there, only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky and
faded hemlocks and wood-parsley, fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes, and
rampant nettles and thistles. A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and
cheerful garden after the close Forest.

The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening
daylight in the sky. At the far side of the glade there was a break in the
wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into
the wood, wide in places and open above, though every now and again the
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path they
rode. They were still climbing gently, but they now went much quicker, and
with better heart; for it seemed to them that the Forest had relented, and
was going to let them pass unhindered after all.

But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The trees drew
close again on either side, and they could no longer see far ahead. Now
stronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood pressing on
them. So silent was it that the fall of their ponies' hoofs, rustling on
dead leaves and occasionally stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud in
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank
to a murmur.

O! Wanderers in the shadowed land
despair not! For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day's end, or the day begun.




For east or west all woods must fail...

Fail - even as he said the word his voice faded into silence. The air
seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome. Just behind them a large
branch fell from an old overhanging tree with a crash into the path. The
trees seemed to close in before them.

They do not like all that about ending and failing,' said Merry. 'I
should not sing any more at present. Wait till we do get to the edge, and
then we'll turn and give them a rousing chorus!'

He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did not show
it. The others did not answer. They were depressed. A heavy weight was
settling steadily on Frodo's heart, and he regretted now with every step
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace of the trees. He
was, indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if that was still
possible), when things took a new turn. The path stopped climbing, and
became for a while nearly level. The dark trees drew aside, and ahead they
could see the path going almost straight forward. Before them, but some
distance off, there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald
head out of the encircling wood. The path seemed to be making directly for
it.

They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of climbing
out for a while above the roof of the Forest. The path dipped, and then
again began to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep
hillside. There it left the trees and faded into the turf. The wood stood
all round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a
shaven crown.

The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round until they
reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleaming
and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near at
hand the mist was now almost gone; though here and there it lay in hollows
of the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold cutting right
across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.

'That,' said Merry, pointing with his hand, 'that is the line of the
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through
the

midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to
go that way! The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest part of the
whole wood - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.'




The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, but they
could see little but mists over the damp and deep-cut valley; and beyond it
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.

The sun on the hill-lop was now getting hot. It must have been about
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the
Hedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond it. Northward, where they
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of the
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea
of trees, and the horizon was veiled.

On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the
slopes of the hill were continued far down under the trees, like
island-shores that really are the sides of a mountain rising out of deep
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them,
while they ate their mid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed noon they
glimpsed far off in the east the grey-green lines of the Downs that lay
beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for it was
good to see a sight of anything beyond the wood's borders, though they did
not mean to go that way, if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as
sinister a reputation in hobbit-legend as the Forest itself.

At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path that had
brought them to the hill reappeared on the northward side; but they had not
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the
right. Soon it began to descend rapidly and they guessed that it must
actually be heading towards the Withy windle valley: not at all the direction
they wished lo take. After some discussion they decided to leave this
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to
see it from the hill-top, the Road must lie that way, and it could not be
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed
lo be drier and more open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were
thinner, and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange
and nameless trees of the denser wood.

At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair
speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun in an open glade they
seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after a time the trees
began to close in again, just where they had appeared from a distance to be
thinner and less tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were discovered




unexpectedly, like the ruts of great giant-wheels or wide moats and sunken
roads long disused and choked with brambles. These lay usually right across
their line of march, and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they
climbed down they found the hollow filled with thick bushes and matted
undergrowth, which somehow would not yield to the left, but only gave way
when they turned to the right; and they had to go some distance along the
bottom before they could find a way up the further bank. Each time they
clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and darker; and always to the left
and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the
right and downwards.

After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They
were being headed off, and were simply following a course chosen for them -
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it.

The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled into a
fold that was wider and deeper than any they had yet met. It was so sleep
and overhung that it proved impossible to climb out of it again, either
forwards or backwards, without leaving their ponies and their baggage
behind. All they could do was to follow the fold - downwards. The ground
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy
bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and
noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully
over-arched by trees high above them.

After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they came quite
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before
them. Coming to the opening they found that they had made their way down
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank
almost as steep. A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy
upon the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark
river of brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with
willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with thousands of faded
willow-leaves. The air was thick with them, fluttering yellow from the
branches; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the
valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.




'Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!' said Merry.

'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is
the River Withy windle! I will go on and explore.'

He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long grasses.
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground
between the cliff-foot and the river; in some places firm turf went down to
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he said, 'there seems to be something like
a footpath winding along on this side of the river. If we turn left and
follow it, we shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest
eventually.'

'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That is, if the track goes on so far, and
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. Who made the track,
do you suppose, and why? I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting
very suspicious of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe
all the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we should
have to go?'

'No,' said Merry, 'I haven't. I don't know in the least how far down
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to
make

a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.'

There being nothing else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and grasses were lush
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy
to follow, as it turned and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills, running down
gullies into the Withywindle out of the higher forest-lands, and at these
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.

The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies of all
kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning on their
backs. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great grey branches
reached across the path. Each step forward became more reluctant than the
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their legs,
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes.

Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step without rest. Must have nap. It's cool
under the willows. Less flies!'




Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come on!' he cried. 'We can't
have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were
too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.

Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head swam.
There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing.
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes
and saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it
looked, its sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many
long-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures
that creaked faintly as the boughs moved. The leaves fluttering against the
bright sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the
grass.

Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay down with their
backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped wide to
receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their
eyes, and then it seemed that they could almost hear words, cool words,
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow.

Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was overpowering
him; then with an effort he struggled to his feel again. He felt a
compelling desire for cool water. 'Wait for me, Sam,' he stammered. 'Must
bathe feet a minute.'

Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree,
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonets
straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back
against the tree.

Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern. He was
worried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this sudden
sleepiness uncanny. 'There's more behind this than sun and warm air,' he
muttered to himself. 'I don't like this great big tree. I don't trust it.

Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!'

He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become
of the ponies. He found that two had wandered on a good way along the path;
and he had just caught them and brought them back towards the others, when




he heard two noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. One was
the splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast.

He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the edge,
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and dragged him from under
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once
he woke, and coughed and spluttered.

'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree threw me in! I
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!'

'You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.'

'What about the others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder what sort of dreams
they are having.'

They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam understood
the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The crack by which he had
laid himself had closed together, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside,
but the rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped
like a pair of pincers.

Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had lain.

They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held
poor Merry. It was quite useless.

'What a foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo wildly. 'Why did we ever
come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow!' He
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless of his own feet. A hardly
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter.

'I suppose we haven't got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked
Sam.

'I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That
wouldn't be much use.'

'Wait a minute!' cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by firewood.

'We might do something with fire!'

'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin
alive inside.'




'We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,' said Sam
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go, I'll have it down, if I have to gnaw
it.' He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder-boxes
and a hatchet.

Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and made
a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped against the
trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had
struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of
flame and smoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little fingers of fire licked
against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched it. A tremor
ran through the whole willow. The leaves seemed to hiss above their heads
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell.

'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you
don't. He says so!'

'Who? What?' shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of the
tree.

'Put it out! Put it out!' begged Merry. The branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading
outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they
had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river -valley and set up
ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at the
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of
why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran along the path crying help! help!
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill
voice: it was blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate:
lost and witless.

Suddenly he slopped. There was an answer, or so he thought; but it
seemed to come from behind him, away down the path further back in the
Forest. He turned round and listened, and soon there could be no doubt:
someone was singing a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and
happily, but it was singing nonsense:

Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo!

Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow!

Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!




Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both
stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so they
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song:

Hey! Come merry dot ! derry dol! My darling!

Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.

Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,

Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,

There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter,

Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.

Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing

Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?

Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o,

Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!

Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!

Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.

Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing.

Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?

Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so it
seemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one,
slumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red
as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his
hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white
water-lilies.

'Help!' cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands
stretched out.

'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up one hand, and
they stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff. 'Now, my little
fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing like a bellows? What's the matter
here then? Do you know who I am? I'm Tom Bombadil. Tell me what's
your




trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!'

'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly.

'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam.

'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. 'Old Man Willow?
Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be mended. I know the tune for
him. Old grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his marrow cold, if he don't behave
himself. I'll sing his roots off. I'll sing a wind up and blow leaf and
branch away. Old Man Willow!' Setting down his lilies carefully on the
grass, he ran to the tree. There he saw Merry's feet still sticking out -
the rest had already been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouth to the
crack and began singing into it in a low voice. They could not catch the
words, but evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick. Tom sprang
away, and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of the willow with
it. 'You let them out again, Old Man Willow!' he said. 'What be you
a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water!
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized Merry's feet and drew him
out of the suddenly widening crack.

There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then with a loud snap both cracks
closed fast again. A shudder ran through the tree from root to tip, and
complete silence fell.

'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other.

Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. 'Well, my little fellows!' said he,
stooping so that he peered into their faces. 'You shall come home with me!
The table is all laden with yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread and
butter. Goldberry is waiting. Time enough for questions around the supper
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up
his lilies, and then with a beckoning wave of his hand went hopping and
dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically.

Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed after him
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in
front of them, and the noise of his singing got fainter and further away.
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!

Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!

Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle.

Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping.

When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,




Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.

Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!

Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.

Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you!

After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to
sink into the trees behind them. They thought of the slanting light of
evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and the windows of Bucklebury
beginning to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them;
trunks and branches of trees hung dark and threatening over the path. White
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the
roots of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.

It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on
either side of them; and if they looked up to the pale sky, they caught
sight of queer gnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against the
twilight, and leered down at them from the high bank and the edges of the
wood. They began to feel that all this country was unreal, and that they
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening.

Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed
that the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In the
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river flowed over
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left
behind. They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweep of grass
welling up before them. The river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars, which
were already shining in the sky.

The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge.
The path was now plain before them, well -tended and bordered with stone. It
wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the pale starry
night; and there, still high above them on a further slope, they saw the
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up
a long smooth hillside of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow
beam flowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom
Bombadil’s house before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep
shoulder of the land lay grey and bare, and beyond that the dark shapes of




the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night.

They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half their
weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! Come merry dol!
rolled out the song to greet them.

Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties!

Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties.

Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together!

Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like the
song of a glad water flowing down into the night from a bright morning in
the hills, came falling like silver to meet them:

Now let the song begin! Let us sing together

Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,

Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,

Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,

Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:

Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!

And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a golden
light was all about them.




Chapter 7 . In the House of Tom Bombadil



The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and stood
still, blinking. They were in a long low room, filled with the light of
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly.

In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer door, sat a
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown was
green,

green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads of dew; and her belt was
of gold, shaped like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of
forget-me-nots. About her feel in wide vessels of green and brown
earthenware, white water-lilies were floating, so that she seemed to be
enthroned in the midst of a pool.

’Enter, good guests!' she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was
her clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further
into the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely surprised and
awkward, like folk that, knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of
water, have been answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.
But before they could say anything, she sprang lightly up and over the
lily -bowls, and ran laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled
softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river.

’Come dear folk!' she said, taking Frodo by the hand. Faugh and be
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.' Then lightly she passed them
and closing the door she turned her back to it, with her white arms spread
out across it. 'Let us shut out the night!' she said. 'For you are still
afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things.
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.'

The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and
smiled. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' said Frodo at last, feeling his heart moved
with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as he had at times stood
enchanted by fair el ven- voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was
different: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeper and nearer to
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said
again. 'Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to




me.

O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water !

O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter!

O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after!

O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!'

Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with surprise to hear
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed.

'Welcome!' she said. 'I had not heard that folk of the Shire were so
sweet -tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light in your eyes and
the ring in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait
for the Master of the house! He will not be long. He is tending your tired
beasts.'

The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry
busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere behind
the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught, among
many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words:

Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;

Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.

'Fair lady!' said Frodo again after a while. 'Tell me, if my asking
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?'

'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling.

Frodo looked at her questioningly. 'He is, as you have seen him,' she
said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.'

'Then all this strange land belongs to him?'

'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a
burden,' she added in a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees and the
grasses and all things growing or living in the land belong each to
themselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom
walking in the forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops under
light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.'

A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his
thick

brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He laughed, and going to
Goldberry, took her hand.

'Here's my pretty lady!' he said, bowing to the hobbits. 'Here's my
Goldberry clothed all in silver -green with flowers in her girdle! Is the




table laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter;
milk, cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for
us? Is the supper ready?'

'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?'

Tom clapped his hands and cried: 'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and
you had near forgotten! Come now, my merry friends, and Tom will refresh
you! You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!'

He opened the door, and they followed him down a short passage and
round a sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping roof (a
penthouse, it seemed, built on to the north end of the house). Its walls
were of clean stone, but they were mostly covered with green hanging mats
and yellow curtains. The floor was flagged, and strewn with fresh green
rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled with white blankets,
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench
laden with wide earthenware basins, and beside it stood brown ewers filled
with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set
ready beside each bed.

Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the
table, two on each side, while at either end sat Goldberry and the Master.

It was a long and merry meal. Though the hobbits ate, as only famished
hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking -bowls seemed
to be clear cold water, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set free
their voices. The guests became suddenly aware that they were singing
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking.

At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly. The
guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were set in chairs, each with a
footstool to his tired feet. There was a fire in the wide hearth before
them, and it was burning with a sweet smell, as if it were built of
apple-wood. When everything was set in order, all the lights in the room
were put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at each end of the
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood before them, holding a candle;
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep.

'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!

For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the
wind off the hill-top. Good night!' She passed out of the room with a
glimmer and a rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream falling




gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night.

Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to
muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had meant to ask at
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke:

'Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that brought
you at that moment?'

Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said
he. 'Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Just
chance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was no plan of mine,
though I was waiting for you. We heard news of you, and learned that you
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water: all paths
lead that way, down to Withywindle. Old grey Willow-man, he's a mighty
singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom
had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom nodded as if sleep was
taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice:

I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,
green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,
the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter,
to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted.

Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open first in spring and there they linger latest.

By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.

Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating!

He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue:

And that proved well for you — for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing
Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.

He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more
question: the one he most desired to have answered. 'Tell us, Master,' he
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.'

'No, don't!' said Merry and Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright.

'Not now! Not until the morning!'




That is right!' said the old man. 'Now is the time for resting. Some
things are ill to hear when the world's in shadow. Sleep till the
morning -light, rest on the pillow ! Heed no nightly noise! Fear no grey
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a
candle in either hand he led them out of the room.

Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blankets were
of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves on the deep beds and drawn
the light covers over them before they were asleep.

In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he saw the
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall
of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle of
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood
the figure of a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the
dark plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howling of many
wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a light flashed from the staff that he
wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed
and

the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.
'Black Riders!' thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs
still echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the
courage to leave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still
listening; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream.

At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change came over his
dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had
waked,

and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream:
tip-tap, squeak : the noise was like branches fretting in the wind,
twig-fingers scraping wall and window: creak, creak, creak. He wondered if
there were willow-trees close to the house; and then suddenly he had a
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the
willow and listening to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him




again. He sat up, and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay
down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: ’Fear
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went
to sleep again.

It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quiet
sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading, spreading
irresistibly all round the house into a dark shoreless pool. It gurgled
under the walls, and was rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he
thought. It will find its way in, and then I shall drown.' He felt that he
was lying in a soft slimy bog, and springing up he set his fool on the
corner of a cold hard flagstone. Then he remembered where he was and lay
down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors or
windows save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.' A
little breath of sweet air moved the curtain. He breathed deep and fell
asleep again.

As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep
content, if logs are contented.

They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom was moving
about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped
his hands, and cried: 'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew
back the yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered the
windows, at either end of the room, one looking east and the other looking
west.

They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and found
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to
see turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually
his view was screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a
pale morning: in the East, behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool
stained red at the edges, lay glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of
rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly, and the red flowers on
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.

Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool of mist. The
Forest was hidden under a fog. It was like looking down on to a sloping
cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken
into many plumes and billows; the valley of the Withywindle. The stream ran
down the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand




was a flower-garden and a clipped hedge silver -netted, and beyond that grey
shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen.

'Good morning, merry friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a rainy smell. 'Sun won't show her face
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet
sky above me. I wakened Goldberry singing under window; but nought
wakes

hobbit-folk in the early morning. In the night little folk wake up in the
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo del! derry del,
my hearties! If you come soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!'

Needless to say - not that Tom's threat sounded very serious - the
hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard
about the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and
singing here and there outside. The room looked westward over the
mist-clouded valley, and the window was open. Water dripped down from the
thatched eaves above. Before they had finished breakfast the clouds had
joined into an unbroken roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.

As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing
up above them. They could hear few words, but it seemed plain to them that
the song was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the
tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed
the kindly weather, because it delayed them from departing. The thought of
going had been heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed
now

that they would not go further that day.

The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds rolled
up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could
be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo stood near the open
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and




go bubbling away down into the valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round
the

corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain - and
indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he sat in the
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him.

This is Goldberry's washing day,' he said, ’and her autumn-cleaning.

Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It’s a good day
for long tales, for questions and for answers, so Tom will start the
talking.’

He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if
speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them suddenly with a bright blue
eye under his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would
get out of his chair and dance about. He told them tales of bees and
flowers, the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, about
the evil things and good things, things friendly and things unfriendly,
cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles.

As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest,
apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers where all
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out of his talk was Old
Man Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more
than

enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom’s words laid bare the hearts of
trees and their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with
a hatred of things that go free upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking,
hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest
without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten
woods; and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the
fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The
countless years had filled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and with
malice. But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart was
rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning, and a master of
winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods on both sides of the
river. His grey thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like
fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till
it had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest from the Hedge
to the Downs.




Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up the young
stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and worn rocks, and among
small flowers in close grass and wet crannies, wandering at last up on to
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the
stone-rings upon the hills and in the hollows among the hills. Sheep were
bleating in flocks. Green walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young Sun
shone like fire on the red metal of their new and greedy swords. There was
victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and
mounds covered them, and the stone doors were shut; and the grass grew over
all. Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the hills were
empty again. A shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were
stirred in the mounds. Barrow- wights walked in the hollow places with a
clink of rings on cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.' Stone rings
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight.

The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of the
Barrow- wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been heard. But it
was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listen to, even by a comfortable
fireside far away. These four now suddenly remembered what the joy of this
house had driven from their minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another.

When they caught his words again they found that he had now wandered
into strange regions beyond their memory and beyond their waking thought,
into limes when the world was wider, and the seas flowed straight to the
western Shore; and still on and back Tom went singing out into ancient
starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and
they saw that he nodded as if he was falling asleep. The hobbits sat still
before him, enchanted; and it seemed as if, under the spell of his words,
the wind had gone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had been
withdrawn, and darkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was
filled with the light of white stars.

Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days had passed
Frodo could not tell. Ele did not feel either hungry or tired, only filled
with wonder. The stars shone through the window and the silence of the
heavens seemed to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a




sudden fear of that silence:

’Who are you, Master?' he asked.

’Eh, what?' said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom.

'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only answer. Tell me, who are you,
alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that's
what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river and the
trees; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn. He made paths
before the Big People, and saw the little People arriving. He was here
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow- wights. When the Elves passed
westward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the dark
under the stars when it was fearless - before the Dark Lord came from
Outside.'

A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced hastily
through the panes. When they turned again, Goldberry stood in the door
behind, framed in light. She held a candle, shielding its flame from the
draught with her hand; and the light flowed through it, like sunlight
through a white shell.

'The rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running downhill,
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!'

'And let us have food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are thirsty.

And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!' With that he
jumped out of his chair, and with a bound took a candle from the
chimney-shelf and lit it in the flame that Goldberry held; then he danced
about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared.

Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom and
Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and half in
laughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and odd the
caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave a single dance,
neither hindering the other, in and out of the room, and round about the
table; and with great speed food and vessels and lights were set in order.

The boards blazed with candles, white and yellow. Tom bowed to his guests.
'Supper is ready,' said Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was
clothed all in silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes'
mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and
he had green stockings.

It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell of




Tom's words may have missed one meal or many, but when the food was
before

them it seemed at least a week since they had eaten. They did not sing or
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in
mirth and laughter.

After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs that
began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence; and in the
silences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than any they had
known, and looking into them they saw the sky below them and the stars like
jewels in the depths. Then once more she wished them each good night and
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them
with

questions.

He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and
indeed to know much of all the history and doings of the Shire down from
days hardly remembered among the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised
them; but he made no secret that he owed his recent knowledge largely to
Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more importance
than

they had imagined. 'There's earth under his old feet, and clay on his
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo.

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.

'Show me the precious Ring!' he said suddenly in the midst of the
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from his
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.

It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and laughed. For a
second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and alarming, of his bright
blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then they gasped. There was no




sign of Tom disappearing!

Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air - and it
vanished with a flash. Frodo gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed
it back to him with a smile.

Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who has
lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the same and
weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to Frodo to weigh
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He
was

perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of what even
Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited for an opportunity, when
the talk was going again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers
and their queer ways - then he slipped the Ring on.

Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked
an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his own ring all
right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and obviously could not
see him. He got up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards the
outer door.

'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in
his shining eyes. 'Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you a-going? Old Tom
Bombadil's not as blind as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and sit down beside me!
We

must talk a while more, and think about the morning. Tom must teach the
right road, and keep your feet from wandering.'

Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came
and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful.
But they would do well to start early; for weather in that country was a
thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long, and it would change
sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket. 'I am no weather-master,'
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.'

By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his house,
over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope in that way
to strike the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the Barrows. He told
them not to be afraid - but to mind their own business.

'Keep to the green grass. Don't you go a-meddling with old stone or




cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass
barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he
taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any danger
or difficulty the next day.

Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!

By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,

By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!

Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!

When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them each on
the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back to their
bedroom.




Chapter 8 . Fog on the Barrow-Downs



That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of
them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running in his
mind; a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey
rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver,
until at last it was rolled back, and a far green country opened before him
under a swift sunrise.

The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like a
tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill and
through the open window. Outside everything was green and pale gold.

After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made ready to say
farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morning: cool,
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh
from the North-west. Their quiet ponies were almost frisky, sniffing and
moving restlessly. Tom came out of the house and waved his hat and danced
upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good
speed.

They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house, and
went slanting up towards the north end of the hill -brow under which it
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their ponies up the last steep
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped.

'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have
never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!' He was so
distressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear call came
rippling down. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair
was flying loose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered. A light
like the glint of water on dewy grass flashed from under her feet as she
danced.

They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They
bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they looked
out from the hill-top over lands under the morning. It was now as clear and
far-seen as it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll in
the Forest, which could now be seen rising pale and green out of the dark
trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green,




yellow, russet under the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of the
Brandywine. To the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a
distant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop
in the lowlands and flowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits.
Northward beyond the dwindling downs the land ran away in flats and
swellings of grey and green and pale earth -colours, until it faded into a
featureless and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, ridge
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it
was no more than a guess of blue and a remote white glimmer blending with
the hem of the sky, but it spoke to them, out of memory and old tales, of
the high and distant mountains.

They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and a few
stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs towards the Road,
when they should be leaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones of
the hills straight towards the Mountains.

Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts. ’Speed
now, fair guests!’ she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind
in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun
shines!' And to Frodo she said: 'Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry
meeting!'

But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony,
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope behind the
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.
The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when
they reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small
and slender like a sunlit flower against the sky: she was standing still
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked
she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished
behind the hill .

Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet
of a steep hill into another deeper and broader valley, and then over the
shoulder of further hills, and down their long limbs, and up their smooth
sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no
tree nor any visible water: it was a country of grass and short springy
turf, silent except for the whisper of the air over the edges of the land,




and high lonely cries of strange birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted,
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown
less. When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest
seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf
and root and mould. A shadow now lay round the edge of sight, a dark haze
above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy.

About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened,
like a shallow saucer with a green mounded rim. Inside there was no air
stirring, and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode across and looked
northwards. Then their hearts rose, for it seemed plain that they had come
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances had now all
become hazy and deceptive, but there could be no doubt that the Downs were
coming to an end. A long valley lay below them winding away northwards,
until it came to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, there
seemed to be no more hills. Due north they faintly glimpsed a long dark
line. That is a line of trees,' said Merry, 'and that must mark the Road.

All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing.

Some say they were planted in the old days.'

'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'If we make as good going this afternoon as we
have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and
be jogging on in search of a camping place.' But even as he spoke he turned
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and
looked down upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds,
and on some were standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of
green gums.

That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight and
went down into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood a single
stone, standing tall under the sun above, and at this hour casting no
shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding
finger, or more like a warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun was
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of
the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had had no power to warm it; but at
that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink, and made as
good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of
the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.

Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun and the




scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are, perhaps, enough to
explain what happened. However, that may be: they woke suddenly and
uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The standing stone
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward over them.
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming through the mist just above
the west wall of the hollow in which they lay; north, south, and east,
beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy
and chill. Their ponies were standing crowded together with their heads
down.

The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western rim.

They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out
in dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before their eyes into a white
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads
until it became a roof: they were shut in a hall of mist whose central
pillar was the standing stone.

They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not quite
lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had had of the line
of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which direction it lay. In any
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone
that no thought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed up as
quickly as their chilled fingers would work.

Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rim and
down the long northward slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea. As they
went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair hung lank and
dripping on their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it was so cold
that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became bedewed
with grey drops. Then, mounting their ponies, they went slowly on again,
feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end
of the long valley which they had seen in the morning. Once they were
through the gap, they had only lo keep on in anything like a straight line
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go
beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs
there might be no fog.

Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated and




wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley
seemed

to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either side
ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they
were at last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the
Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free.

'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over his shoulder, and he hurried
forward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and alarm. The dark
patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous
before him and leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of a
headless door, two huge standing stones. He could not remember having seen
any sign of these in the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the
morning. He had passed between them almost before he was aware: and even
as

he did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and snorted,
and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he called. 'Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why
don't you keep up?'

There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stones
shouting wildly: 'Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into the mist
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry:
'Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the
great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill.

As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and more
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faint
and far ahead and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of
the mist: and then a cry that sounded like help, help! often repeated,
ending with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut
short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries;
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that
it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be
climbing up and up.

Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he
at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary, sweating and yet
chilled. It was wholly dark.




'Where are you?' he cried out miserably.

There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware that it
was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing past him
now

in shreds and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was less
near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were
appearing overhead amid the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind
began to hiss over the grass.

He imagined suddenly that he caught a muffled cry, and he made towards
it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and
the starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him that he was now facing
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from the
north. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. To his right there
loomed against the westward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood
there.

’Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid.

'Here!' said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of the
ground. 'I am waiting for you!'

'No!' said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he
looked

up, in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars. It
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a
pale light that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then a grip
stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and
he remembered no more.

When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall nothing
except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was imprisoned,
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he
was probably already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow- wights about
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself:
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast.

But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the
Shire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage




hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid
hobbit, wailing for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo
was neither very fat nor very timid; indeed, though he did not know it,

Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no
longer felt limp like a helpless prey.

As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all
at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light was
growing round him. It did not at first show him what kind of a place he was
in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floor
beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and there
in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were
on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale; and they were clad in
white. About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light
they looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks
lay one long naked sword.

Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The voice
seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin,
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad
but horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape themselves:
grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. The night was railing
against the morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived that it
had changed into an incantation:

Cold be hand and heart and bone,

and cold be sleep under stone:

never mare to wake on stony bed,

never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.

In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.

He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself




on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind
of passage which behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.

At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by the
incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find
some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do.

But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too strong: he
could not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping in his pocket,
and then fought with himself again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer.
Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay
beside him, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his companions.
With what strength he had he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and
the hand broke off; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the
hilt. There was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a
snarling noise.

Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once
back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of
the fog, came the memory of the house down under the Hill, and of Tom
singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small
desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that name his voice
seemed to grow strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber
echoed as if to drum and trumpet.

Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!

By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,

By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!

Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!

There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his heart
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was
coming down through the ground or through thick walls, an answering voice
singing:

Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,

Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.

None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:




His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster.

There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling, and
suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A low
door -like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond Frodo's feet;
and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of
the sun rising red behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the
faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did not stir, but the
sickly hue had left them. They looked now as if they were only very deeply
asleep.

Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing:

Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight!

Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,

Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!

Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty!

Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,

Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.

At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber
fell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailing shriek, fading away
into an unguessable distance; and after that silence.

’Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean grass! You
must help me bear them.'

Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left the
barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still,
like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again,
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he
was

bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of gold, silver,
copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He
climbed

the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine.

There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in his hair, and
looked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their backs upon
the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a
clear and commanding voice:

Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling!

Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen;

Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.




Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open!

To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed
their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about in amazement,
first at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life on the barrow-top
above them; and then at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.

'What in the name of wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet
that had slipped over one eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his
face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he said. 'The men of
Carn Dym came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the spear in my
heart!' He clutched at his breast. 'No! No!' he said, opening his eyes.

'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?'

'I thought that I was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!'

'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung
his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly, as
if he expected to find his cloak, jacket, and breeches, and other
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.

'You won't find your clothes again,' said Tom, bounding down from the
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the sunlight. One would have
thought that nothing dangerous or dreadful had happened; and indeed the
horror faded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw the merry
glint in his eyes.

'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half
amused. 'Why not?'

But Tom shook his head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be
glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now heart and limb!
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!'

He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him
Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green hollow between
their

hill and the next, still whistling and crying:

Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?

Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?

Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,

White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!




So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until he
was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey now! hoy now!
came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south.

The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran about for a while
on the grass, as he told them. Then they lay basking in the sun with the
delight of those that have been wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a
friendly clime, or of people that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake
one day to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of
promise.

By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He
reappeared, hat first, over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an
obedient line six ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly
old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger, fatter (and older) than their
own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them
any such names, but they answered to the new names that Tom had given
them

for the rest of their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.

'Here are your ponies, now!' he said. 'They've more sense (in some
ways) than you wandering hobbits have - more sense in their noses. For they
sniff danger ahead which you walk right into; and if they run to save
themselves, then they run the right way. You must forgive them all; for
though their hearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow- wights is not what
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!'

Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments from
their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged to put on
some of the thicker and warmer things that they had brought against the
oncoming of winter.

'Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?'
asked Frodo.

'He's mine,' said Tom. 'My four-legged friend; though I seldom ride
him, and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides. When your ponies
stayed with me, they got to know my Lumpkin; and they smelt him in the
night, and quickly ran to meet him. I thought he'd look for them and with
his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old
Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road;
so he needs a pony. For you cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding,




when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.'

The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many times;
but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he
would not feel happy till he had seen them safe over the borders of his
land. Tve got things to do,' he said: 'my making and my singing, my
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country. Tom can't be always
near to open doors and willow-cracks. Tom has his house to mind, and
Goldberry is waiting.'

It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine and ten,
and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had been lunch
beside the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted now off the
remainder of Tom's provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that
Tom had brought with him. It was not a large meal (considering hobbits and
the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he
made into a pile that glistened and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie
there 'free to all finders, birds, beasts. Elves or Men, and all kindly
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and
no Wight ever come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch
set with blue stones, many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue
butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his
head, and saying at last:

'Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was she who long
ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not
forget her!'

For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen,
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold.
They

gleamed as he drew them from their black sheaths, wrought of some strange
metal, light and strong, and set with many fiery stones. Whether by some
virtue in these sheaths or because of the spell that lay on the mound, the
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.

'Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,' he said.

'Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east, south, or
far away into dark and danger.' Then he told them that these blades were
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the
Dark




Lord, but they were overcome by the evil king of Carn Dym in the Land of
Angmar.

'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured, 'yet still some go wandering,
sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding from evil things
folk that are heedless.'

The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke they had a
vision as it were of a great expanse of years behind them, like a vast
shadowy plain over which there strode shapes of Men, tall and grim with
bright swords, and last came one with a star on his brow. Then the vision
faded, and they were back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again.

They made ready, packing their bags and lading their ponies. Their new
weapons they hung on their leather belts under their jackets, feeling them
very awkward, and wondering if they would be of any use. Fighting had not
before occurred to any of them as one of the adventures in which their
flight would land them.

At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; and then
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw the
top of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight on the gold went
up like a yellow flame. Then they turned a shoulder of the Downs and it was
hidden from view.

Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great
stones standing like a gate, and before long they came to the northern gap
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry
journey with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, on
Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom
sang

most of the time, but it was chiefly nonsense, or else perhaps a strange
language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were
mainly

those of wonder and delight.

They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further
away than they had imagined. Even without a fog, their sleep at mid-day
would have prevented them from reaching it until after nightfall on the day
before. The dark line they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of
bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the further
side. Tom said that it had once been the boundary of a kingdom, but a very
long lime ago. He seemed to remember something sad about it, and would not




say much.

They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap in the wall,
and then Tom turned due north, for they had been bearing somewhat to the
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace,
but the sun was already sinking low when at last they saw a line of tall
trees ahead, and they knew that they had come back to the Road after many
unexpected adventures. They galloped their ponies over the last furlongs,
and halted under the long shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a
sloping bank, and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away
below

them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west to North-east, and on
their right it fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes full of
water. They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There was nothing
to

be seen. 'Well, here we are again at last!' said Frodo. 'I suppose we
haven’t lost more than two days by my short cut through the Forest! But
perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail.'

The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black Riders
came suddenly over them again. Ever since they had entered the Forest they
had thought chiefly of getting back to the Road; only now when it lay
beneath their feet did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was
more than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road itself. They
looked anxiously back towards the setting sun, but the Road was brown and
empty.

'Do you think,' asked Pippin hesitatingly, 'do you think we may be
pursued, tonight?'

'No, I hope not tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next
day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain. Out east my
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the Black Land far beyond
his country.'

All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that
he would know how to deal with Black Riders, if anyone did. They would
soon

now be going forward into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but
the most vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering
twilight they longed for home. A deep loneliness and sense of loss was on




them. They stood silent, reluctant to make the final parting, and only
slowly became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting.

’Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that your
own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'll
come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors looking westward.
There you'll find an old inn that is called The Prancing Pony. Barliman
Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards
the morning will speed you upon your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your
merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!'

They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once more
with them; but he laughed and refused, saying:

Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders.

Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!

Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's back, and rode
up over the bank and away singing into the dusk.

The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight.

'I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,' said Sam. 'He's a
caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and see
naught better, nor queerer. But I won't deny I'll be glad to see this
Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope it'll be like The Green Dragon away back
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?'

'There are hobbits in Bree,' said Merry, 'as well as Big Folk. I
daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts.

My people ride out there now and again.'

'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire
all the same. Don't make yourselves too much at home ! Please remember -all
of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill,
if any name must be given.'

They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the evening.
Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again,
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead.

Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass against misty
stars; and under its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it they
now hurried desiring only to find a fire, and a door between them and the
night.




Chapter 9 . At the Sign of



The Prancing Pony

Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides Bree itself, there
was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep valley a little
further eastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round
Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland
only a few miles broad.

The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short, cheerful
and independent: they belonged to nobody but themselves; but they were more
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of
the world about them than was (or is) usual with Big People. According to
their own tales they were the original inhabitants and were the descendants
of the first Men that ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few
had survived the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned
again over the Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they
were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded into the
grass.

In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing
of

their origin. They were taller and darker than the Men of Bree and were
believed to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards
even as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen.
When they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange forgotten
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends
of them.

There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land and they
claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that was
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized.
They lived mostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree itself,
especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men.




The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they called one another) were on
friendly terms, minding their own affairs in their own ways, but both
rightly regarding themselves as necessary parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found.

The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much; and the
affairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Occasionally the
Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland, or the Eastfarthing; but though
their link land was not much further than a day's riding east of the
Brandywine Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. An
occasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would come out to the Inn for a
night or two, but even that was becoming less and less usual. The
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond
the borders, as Outsiders, and took very little interest in them,
considering them dull and uncouth. There were probably many more
Outsiders

scattered about in the West of the World in those days than the people of
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no better than tramps, ready to
dig a hole in any bank and stay only as long as it suited them. But in the
Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no more
rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going between
the

Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts.

The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big Folk,
mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with windows looking west.
On that side, running in more than half a circle from the hill and back to
it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the inner side. Over this
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road
ran out of the village. The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers.

Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the foot of
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;
another ancient road crossed the East Road just outside (he dike at the
western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying




in the Eastfarthing, descending from those days, when news from North,
South, and East could be heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits used
to go more often to hear it. But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,
and the North Road was now seldom used: it was grass-grown, and the
Bree-folk called it the Greenway.

The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper was an
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and
inquisitive among the inhabitants, large and small, of the four villages;
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.

It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the village.
They came to the West-gate and found it shut, but at the door of the lodge
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and
looked over the gate at them in surprise.

’What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly.

'We are making for the inn here,' answered Frodo. 'We are journeying
east and cannot go further tonight.'

'Hobbits ! Four hobbits ! And what's more, out of the Shire by their
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared at
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and let them ride
through.

'We don't often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,' he went
on, as they halted a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon my wondering what
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?'

'Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a good
place to discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of the man or the
tone of his voice.

'Your business is your own, no doubt,' said the man; 'but it's my
business to ask questions after nightfall.'

'We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to
stay at the inn here,' put in Merry. 'I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough
for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had
heard.'

'All right, all right!' said the man. 'I meant no offence. But you'll
find maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking you
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go on to The Pony, you'll find




you're oat the only guests.'

He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see
in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them curiously. He was
glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they rode forward. He
wondered why the man was so suspicious, and whether any one had been
asking

for news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? He might have
arrived, while they were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.

The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back to
his house. As soon as his back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street.

The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached houses,
and drew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and strange to them.
Sam stared up at the inn with its three storeys and many windows, and felt
his heart sink. He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees,
and other creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the course
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of Men and
their tall houses uite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring
day. He pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows.

'We surely aren't going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?' he
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk in these pans, why don't we look for
some that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.'

'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil recommended it.
I expect it's homelike enough inside.'

Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes.

It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on land partly cut
out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor
windows were level with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to a
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was a
large doorway reached by a few broad steps. The door was open and light
streamed out of it. Above the arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a
large signboard: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN
BUTTERBUR. Many

of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.




As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing a merry
song inside, and many cheerful voices joined loudly in the chorus. They
listened to this encouraging sound for a moment and then got off their
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping.

They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing in the
yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a
short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and
was bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden
with full mugs.

’Can we—' began Frodo.

'Half a minute, if you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out
again, wiping his hands on his apron.

'Good evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be
wanting?'

'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be managed.

Are you Mr. Butterbur?'

'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!
You're from the Shire, eh?' he said, and then suddenly he clapped his hand
to his forehead, as if trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried.

'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?'

'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My
name is Underhill.'

'There now!' said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers. 'It's gone
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to think. I'm run off my feet;
but I'll see what I can do for you. We don't often get a party out of the
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is
such a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn't been for long
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree.

'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where are you, you woolly -footed slow-coach?
Nob!'

'Coming, sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a door,
and seeing the travellers, stopped short and stared at them with great
interest.

'Where's Bob?' asked the landlord. 'You don't know? Well find him!
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted




off with a grin and a wink.

'Well, now, what was I going to say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight,
my head is going round. There's a party that came up the Greenway from
down

South last night - and that was strange enough to begin with. Then there's a
travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening. And now
there's you. If you weren't hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But
we've got a room or two in the north wing that were made special for
hobbits, when this place was built. On the ground floor as they usually
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable.
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!'

He led them a short way down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard work for two legs,
but I don't get thinner. I'll look in again later. If you want anything,
ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!'

Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed
capable of an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They found
themselves in a small and cosy room. There was a bit of bright fire burning
on the hearth, and in front of it were some low and comfortable chairs.
There was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a
large hand-bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant, came bustling in long before
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.

'Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall
I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?'

They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr.
Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid. There
was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter,
and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show,
and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam's misgivings (already much
relieved by the excellence of the beer).

The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them.

'I don't know whether you would care to join the company, when you have
supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your
beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you, if you had a
mind. We don't get Outsiders - travellers from the Shire, I should say,




begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story
or song you may have in mind. But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack
anything!'

So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper
(about three uarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit here uietly by the fire for a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don't
forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the
high-road and not very far from the Shire!'

'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself! Don't get lost, and don't
forget that it is safer indoors!'

The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gathering was
large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light.

This came chiefly from a blazing log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from
the beams were dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur was
standing near the fire, talking to a couple of dwarves and one or two
strange-looking men. On the benches were various folk: men of Bree, a
collection of local hobbits (sitting chattering together), a few more
dwarves, and other vague figures difficult to make out away in the shadows
and comers.

As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus of welcome
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had come up the
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to
the Bree-folk, so uickly that, though they caught many names, they were
seldom sure who the names belonged to. The Men of Bree seemed all to have
rather botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight,
Goatleaf, Heathertoes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention
Butterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The Mug worts, for
instance, seemed numerous. But most of them had natural names, such as
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which
were

used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from Saddle, and as they
could not imagine sharing a name without being related, they took Frodo to
their hearts as a long-lost cousin.

The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inuisitive, and Frodo
soon found that some explanation of what he was doing would have to be




given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which
there was much wagging of heads, although neither of these words were much
used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was thinking of writing a book (at
which there was silent astonishment), and that he and his friends wanted to
collect information about hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in
the eastern lands.

At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted to
write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned enough for
several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given
a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he could
go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their uestions about
doings in the Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around.

The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and telling
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There was trouble away
in the South, and it seemed that the Men who had come up the Greenway
were

on the move, looking for lands where they could find some peace. The
Bree-folk were sympathetic, but plainly not very ready to take a large
number of strangers into their little land. One of the travellers, a
suint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling that more and more people
would be coming north in the near future. 'If room isn't found for them,
they'll find it for themselves. They've a right to live, same as other
folk,' he said loudly. The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the
prospect.

The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, and it did not at
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings
in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now
feeling uite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire.
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the
roof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the
fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out
like a floured dumpling. But there were several uestions asked that made
Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in
the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who
they were related to.




Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-beaten man,
sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently to the
hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was smoking a
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs were stretched out before him,
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel -stained cloak of heavy dark-
green

cloth was drawn close about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he
wore a hood that overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be
seen as he watched the hobbits.

’Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to Mr.
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?'

'Him?' said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye
without turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he
pops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; but I haven't
seen him about lately. What his right name is I've never heard: but he's
known round here as Strider. Goes about at a great pace on his long shanks;
though he don't tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there's no
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about him.' But at
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away by a demand for more ale and his
last remark remained unexplained.

Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard or
guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his hand and a
nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As Frodo drew near be
threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of dark hair necked with grey,
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.

'I am called Strider,' he said in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'

'He did,' said Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under the
stare of those keen eyes.

'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider, 'if I were you, I should stop
your young friends from talking too much. Drink, fire, and chance -meeting
are pleasant enough, but, well - this isn't the Shire. There are ueer folk
about. Though I say it as shouldn't, you may think,' he added with a wry




smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And there have been even stranger travellers
through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face.

Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no further
sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin. To his alarm
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success
with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance.

Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local
hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people away beyond
the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and
had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring
the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inuiries
in Bree after that name.

Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much
enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become uite forgetful of
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.

'You had better do something uick!' whispered Strider in his ear.

Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The attention
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo and
laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as
was good for him.

Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his habit
when making a speech) fingering the things in his pocket. He felt the Ring
on its chain, and uite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on
and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if me
suggestion came to him from outside, from someone or something a the room.
He resisted the temptation firmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At
any rate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke 'a few suitable words', as
they would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratified by the
kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will
help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree; and
then he hesitated and coughed.

Everyone in the room was now looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one of
the hobbits. 'A song! A song!' shouted all the others. 'Come on now, master,




sing us something that we haven’t heard before!'

For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began a
ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed rather proud
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that is
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.

There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,

And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his fill.

The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a five-stringed fiddle;

And up and down he runs his bow,

Now sueaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.

The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;

When there's good cheer among the guests,

He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.

They also keep a horned cow
as proud as any ueen;

But music turns her head like ale,

And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.

And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!

For Sunday* there's a special pair,

And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.



The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,




and the cat began to wail;

A dish and a spoon on the table danced,

The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail.

The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair;

And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,

Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air.

Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:

'The white horses of the Moon,

They neigh and champ their silver bits;

But their master's been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun'll be rising soon!'

So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead:

He sueaked and sawed and uickened the tune,
While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
'It's after three!' he said.

They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,

While his horses galloped up in rear,

And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.

Now uicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,

The cow and the horses stood on their heads;

The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the floor.

With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,




And the little dog laughed to see such fun,

And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.

The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.

She * hardly believed her fiery eyes;

For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!

There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and the song
tickled their fancy. 'Where's old Barley?' they cried. 'He ought to hear
this. Bob ought to learn his cat the fiddle, and then we'd have a dance.'

They called for more ale, and began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master!
Come on now! Once more!'

They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song again,
while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known, and they were
uick at picking up words. It was now Frodo's turn to feel pleased with
himself. He capered about on the table; and when he came a second time to
the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for
he came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off
the table with a crash, clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer
disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor
without leaving a hole !

The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their feet
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam,
who

found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from
a distance. It was plain that many people regarded them now as the
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But
there

was one swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with a knowing and
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he
slipped out of the door, followed by the suint-eyed southerner: the two had
been whispering together a good deal during the evening. Harry the
gatekeeper also went out just behind them..

Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled away under




the tables to the dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he
had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had
slipped on when he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.

'Well?' said Strider, when he reappeared. ’Why did you do that? Worse
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or
should I say your finger?'

'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.

'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but we had better wait until the
uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should like a
uiet word with you.'

'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name.

'A matter of some importance - to us both,' answered Strider, looking
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.'

'Very well,' said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk to
you later.'

Meanwhile an argument was going on by the fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had
come trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to several conflicting
accounts of the event at the same time.

'I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,' said a hobbit; 'or leastways I didn't see
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in a manner of
speaking.'

'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled.

'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.'

'There's some mistake somewhere,' said Butterbur, shaking his head.
There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or
into thick air, as is more likely in this room.'

'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.

'How should I know? He's welcome to go where he will, so long as he
pays in the morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.'

'Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn't,' said Mugwort
obstinately.

'And I say there's some mistake,' repeated Butterbur, picking up the




tray and gathering up the broken crockery.

'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.'

He came forward into the firelight; but most of the company backed
away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied
by his explanation that he had crawled away uickly under the tables after
he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.

The

Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.

Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very probably,
that his house would be full again on many future nights, until the present
mystery had been thoroughly discussed. 'Now what have you been doing, Mr.
Underhill?' he asked. 'Frightening my customers and breaking up my crocks
with your acrobatics!'

'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was uite
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.'

'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling,
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand - and warn
me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything out of the way -uncanny,
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.'

'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise
you. And now I think I'll be getting to bed. We shall be making an early
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o'clock?'

'Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with you in
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.'

'Certainly!' said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how many
private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what they would
reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He began to suspect
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs.




Chapter 10. Strider



Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no
light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting
in a chair by the door!

'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?'

'I am called Strider,' he answered: 'and though he may have forgotten
it, your friend promised to have a uiet talk with me.'

'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,' said
Frodo. 'What have you to say?'

'Several things,' answered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.'

'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply.

'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know, and
give you some good advice - but I shall want a reward.'

'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he had brought
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he
could not spare any of it.

'No more than you can afford,' answered Strider with a slow smile, as
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you,
until I wish to leave you.'

'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if
I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.'

'Excellent!' exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back
comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you
what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when
you have heard me.'

'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?'

'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your
business — ' He got up and went to the door, opened it uickly and looked
out. Then he shut it uietly and sat down again. 'I have uick ears,' he
went on, lowering his voice, 'and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted




many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid being seen, if I wish.
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four
hobbits came out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to
old Bombadil or to one another, but one thing interested me. Please
remember, said one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that
I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr.
Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so, I
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.'

'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' said Frodo
angrily, 'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may
have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should
advise him to explain it.'

'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple:

I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted to find him
uickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret
that concerned me and my friends.

'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam
jumped up with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of the secret than you do.

And care is needed!' He leaned forward and looked at them. 'Watch every
shadow!' he said in a low voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree.
On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared
later,

coming up the Greenway from the south.'

There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to
have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said. 'And the
landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the
company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have
stayed uiet in here.'

'It would have been better,' said Strider. 'I would have stopped your
going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me
in to see you, or take a message.'

'Do you think he ' began Frodo.

'No, I don't think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not
altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a
curl of his lip and a ueer gleam in his eye. 'But I hope we shall get to




know one another better. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened
at the end of your song. For that little prank '

'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo.

'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That accident has made your
position dangerous.'

'Hardly more than it was already,' said Frodo. 'I knew these horsemen
were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to
have gone away.'

'You must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return.

And more are coming. There are others. I know their number. I know these
Riders.' He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard. 'And there are some
folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,' he went on. 'Bill Ferny, for
instance. He has an evil name in the Bree-land, and ueer folk call at his
house. You must have noticed him among the company: a swarthy sneering
fellow. He was very close with one of the Southern strangers, and they
slipped out together just after your "accident". Not all of those
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody;
or make mischief for amusement.'

'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?'
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.

'News of you, of course,' answered Strider. 'An account of your
performance would be very interesting to certain people. After that they
would hardly need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely
that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can
do as you like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may say
that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I
have wandered over them for many years. I am older than I look. I might
prove useful. You will have to leave the open road after tonight; for the
horsemen will watch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be
allowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won't go far. They will
come on you in the wild, in some dark place where there is no help. Do you
wish them to find you? They are terrible!'

The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face was
drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched the arms of his chair. The
room was very uiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening
to sounds in the Night far away.




'There!' he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his brow.
'Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You fear them, but
you do not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you
can. Strider can take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you have
him?'

There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was confused
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last he
broke out:

'With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'd say no! This Strider here, he warns
and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let's begin with him. He
comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of such folk. He knows
something, that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we
should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he
puts it.'

Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do

you know it?'

'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get
to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You must
make up your mind. I will answer some of your uestions, if that will help
you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me
already? Still here it is '

At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur had
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider
withdrew into a dark corner.

'I've come to bid you good night,' said the landlord, putting the
candles on the table. 'Nob! Take the water to the rooms!' He came in and
shut the door.

'It's like this,' he began, hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll




admit; and I'm a busy man. But first one thing and then another this week
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see,
I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of
Baggins in particular.'

'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo.

'Ah! you know best,' said the landlord, knowingly. 'I won't give you
away; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the name of
Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you well enough, if I may
say so.'

'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.

'A stout little fellow with red cheeks, ' said Mr. Butterbur solemnly.

Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't help you much; it
goes for most hobbits. Barley, he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with
a glance at Pippin. 'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most,
and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your
pardon, but he said it, not me.'

'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly.

'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is,
but he's a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I don't know what
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into
a block of wood, I shouldn't wonder. He's a bit hasty. Still what's done
can't be undone. '

'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts.

'Where was I?' said the landlord, pausing and snapping his fingers.

'Ah, yes ! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my room
without a knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in the morning. Will you do
something for me? You've only to name it, I said. I'm in a hurry, said he,
and I've no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow,
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and then he gave me a
letter.

'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr. Butterbur, producing a letter
from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly (he valued
his reputation as a lettered man):

Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE.

'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo.




'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?'

'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that letter at once,
and explain why you never sent it. That's what you came to tell me, I
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.'

Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. 'You're right, master,' he said,

'and I beg your pardon. And I'm mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if
harm comes of it. But I didn't keep it back a-purpose. I put it by safe.

Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day
after, and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing after
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a busy man. I'll do what I can to set
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it.

'Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says
to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this way
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that!
But you need ask no uestions. And if I'm not with him, he may be in
trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I'll be
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.'

'What do you mean?' asked Frodo.

'These black men,' said the landlord lowering his voice. 'They're
looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I'm a hobbit. It was on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,

I

called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men were at the door
asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid
the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them; but they've been
asking the same uestion all the way to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger,
Strider, he's been asking uestions, too. Tried to get in here to see you,
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.'

'Fie did!' said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light. 'And
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'

The landlord jumped with surprise. 'You!' he cried. 'You're always
popping up. What do you want now?'

'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo. 'He came to offer me his help.'

'Well, you know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking
suspiciously at Strider. 'But if I was in your plight, I wouldn't take up
with a Ranger.'

'Then who would you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who




only remembers his own name because people shout it at him all day? They
cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?'

'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur,
looking really scared. 'But why can't you stay here uiet for a bit, Mr.
Underhill? What are all these ueer goings on? What are these black men
after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?'

'I'm sorry I can't explain it all,' answered Frodo. 'I am tired and
very worried, and it's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to
warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house. These
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from '

'They come from Mordor,' said Strider in a low voice. 'From Mordor,
Barliman, if that means anything to you.'

'Save us!' cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently was
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It
is,' said Frodo. 'Are you still willing to help me?' 'I am,' said Mr.

Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me can do
against, against ' he faltered.

'Against the Shadow in the East,' said Strider uietly. 'Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he
is far away.'

'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself
this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo's going off has
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree uicker in the uptake than he
is.'

'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo.

'I hope not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks or no spooks, they
won't get in The Pony so easy. Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say
no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while I can stand on my legs. Me
and my folk'll keep watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you
can.'

'In any case we must be called at dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.'

'Right! I'll see to the orders,' said the landlord. 'Good night, Mr.




Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night - now, bless me! Where's your
Mr. Brandybuck?'

'I don’t know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten all
about Merry, and it was getting late. 'I am afraid he is out. He said
something about going for a breath of air.'

'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors uick, but I'll see
your friend is let in when he comes. I'd better send Nob to look for him.
Good night to you all!' At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another
doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps retreated
down the passage.

'Well?' said Strider. 'When are you going to open that letter?' Frodo
looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be
Gandalf s. Inside, written in the wizard's strong but graceful script, was
the following message:

THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418.

Dear Frodo,

Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I find
that you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree.
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business
and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I
do not come, Elrond will advise you.

Yours in haste

GANDALF.

PS. Do NOT use It again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by
night!

PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.

All that is gold does not glitter,

Not all those who wander are lost;

The old that is strong does not wither,

Deep roots are not reached by the frost.

From the ashes a fire shall be woken,

A light from the shadows shall spring;




Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.



PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his
memory is like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he forgets, I
shall roast him.

Fare Well 7

Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
'Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!' he said. 'He deserves
roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in
Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he
was going into great danger.'

'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider.

Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf s
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf s friend at
once?' he asked. 'It would have saved time.'

'Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?' said Strider.

'I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade you to
trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend
to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study you first, and make
sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. As soon as I had
made up my mind, I was ready to tell you whatever you asked. But I must
admit,' he added with a ueer laugh, 'that I hoped you would take to me for
my own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.'

'They are - at first sight at any rate,' laughed Pippin with sudden
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as
we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after
lying for days in hedges and ditches.'

'It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would die
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.'

Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Strider
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?'
he demanded. 'You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You
might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with




you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have
you to say to that?'

'That you are a stout fellow,' answered Strider; 'but I am afraid my
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I
could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk.

If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!'

He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the
hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by his side. They did not dare to
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly.

'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and
if by life or death I can save you, I will.'

There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. 'I
believed that you were a friend before the letter came,' he said, 'or at
least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.'

'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost '

'Did the verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out
what they were about. But how did you know that they were in Gandalf s
letter, if you have never seen it?'

'I did not know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and those verses go
with that name.' He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was
indeed broken a foot below the hilt. 'Not much use is it, Sam?' said
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.'

Sam said nothing.

'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled.

Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we
are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it
unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.'

'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?'

'It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from here
to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have a




chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us.
After Weathertop our journey will become more difficult, and we shall have
to choose between various dangers.'

’When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is,
or what he is doing?'

Strider looked grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came west with him
in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the
last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We
last met on the first of May: at Sam Ford down the Brandywine. He told me
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for
Rivendell in the last week of September. As I knew he was at your side, I
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help.

'I am troubled, for the first time since I have known him. We should
have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When I returned, many
days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone far and wide that
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of
Gildor that told me this; and later they told me that you had left your
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching
the East Road anxiously.'

'Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with
Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo.

'I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except
the Enemy himself,' said Strider. 'But do not give up hope ! Gandalf is
greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.'

Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of
all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is
that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in
the dark to look for him.'

At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the
passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He shut the door
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in
alarm for a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen
them! Black Riders!'

'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?'

'Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you did




not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again and was
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son
of deeper shade among the shadows across the road, just beyond the edge of
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was
no horse.'

'Which way did it go?' asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. Merry
started, noticing the stranger for the first time. 'Go on!' said Frodo.

'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.'

'It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,' continued Merry. 'I
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.'

Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said;

'but it was foolish.'

'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I think. I could
hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went, and
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the other was
whispering, or hissing. I couldn't hear a word that was said. I did not
creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt
terrified, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home, when
something came behind me and I... I fell over.'

'I found him, sir,' put in Nob. 'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with a
lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just
nigh Bill Ferny's house I thought I could see something in the Road. I
couldn't swear to it, but it looked to me as if two men was stooping over
something, lilting it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there
was no signs of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had fallen into deep water," he says to
me, when I shook him. Very ueer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he
got up and ran back here like a hare.'

'I am afraid that's true,' said Merry, 'though I don't know what I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't
know what came over me.'

'I do,' said Strider. 'The Black Breath. The Riders must have left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They
will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before




we leave Bree.'

'What will happen?' said Merry. 'Will they attack the inn?' 'No, I
think not,' said Strider. 'They are not all here yet. And in any case that
is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not
openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they
are desperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before
us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of
the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when
they

left him.'

'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do?'

'Stay here, and do not go to your rooms ! They are sure to have found
out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking north and close
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door.
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.'

While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that
had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's
letter when Strider and Nob returned.

'Well Masters,' said Nob, 'I've ruffled up the clothes and put in a
bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation of your
head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag - Underhill, sir,' he added with a
grin.

Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!' he said. 'But what will happen when
they have penetrated the disguise?'

'We shall see,' said Strider. 'Fet us hope to hold the fort till
morning.'

'Good night to you,' said Nob, and went off to take his part in the
watch on the doors.

Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a low
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that the
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew the
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.

The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They




talked for a little, for Merry still had several uestions to ask.

'Jumped over the Moon!' chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in his
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see.
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.'

'I hope so,' said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.




Chapter 11. A Knife in the Dark



As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river -bank. The house at
Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered
out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air.

As he stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees; the
gate seemed to open of its own accord and close again without a sound.
Terror seized him. He shrank back, and for a moment he stood trembling in
the hall. Then he shut and locked the door.

The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses led with
stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, and three black
figures entered, like shades of night creeping across the ground. One went
to the door, one to the corner of the house on either side; and there they
stood, as still as the shadows of stones, while night went slowly on. The
house and the uiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly.

There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far away. The
cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark
without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed, as if a chill light had been
unsheathed. There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered.

'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing.

At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in.

At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out. It rent the
night like fire on a hill -top.

AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE!

Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep
from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did,
out of the back door, through the garden, and over the fields. When he
reached the nearest house, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the
doorstep. 'No, no, no!' he was crying. 'No, not me! I haven't got it!' It
was some time before anyone could make out what he was babbling about.
At

last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange invasion




from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time.

FEAR! FIRE! FOES!

The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, that had not
been sounded for a hundred years, not since the white wolves came in the
Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over.

AWAKE! AWAKE!

Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black
figures fled from the house. One of them let fall a hobbit-cloak on the
step, as he ran. In the lane the noise of hoofs broke out, and gathering to
a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there
was the sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!
Sauron would deal with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they
knew now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down
the

guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire.

In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if some
sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert
in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement.

Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with
the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to be curling
round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly.

He opened his eyes, and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn-yard.
Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang.

The first grey light of day was in the room, and a cold air was coming
through the open window.

As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their
bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice:
the windows had been forced open and were swinging, and the curtains were
flapping; the beds were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces.

Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr. Butterbur
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he
said), but he had never heard a sound.

'Never has such a thing happened in my time!' he cried, raising his
hands in horror. ’Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good bolsters




ruined and all! What are we coming to?'

'Dark times,' said Strider. 'But for the present you may be left in
peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about
breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed
in a few minutes.'

Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready, and
to fetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had
vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they were
gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place.

Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendell
on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well set out for the
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was
weighing up their strength and courage.

'Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,' he said at last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. 'We should not go
much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to
walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count
on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take
with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or
forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you
prepared to carry on your backs?'

'As much as we must,' said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying to
show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt).

'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly.

'Can't anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a
couple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage? I don't
suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,' he added,
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it.

'I doubt it,' said the landlord unhappily. 'The two or three
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, and they're
gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there
are very few of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I
can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.'

'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you had better do that. I am afraid
we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of
starting early, and slipping away uietly! We might as well have blown a
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.'




'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a crumb, I
hope: we can have breakfast while we wait - and sit down to it. Let's get
hold of Nob!'

In the end there was more than three hours' delay. Bob came back with
the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell.

'A poor old half-starved creature it is,' said Bob; 'but he won't part with
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how you're placed, not if I knows
Bill Ferny.'

'Bill Ferny?' said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?'

'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home
to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only an afterthought of kind
Master Ferny's: just a way of increasing his profits from the affair. The
chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death's door. But there
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?'

Bill Ferny's price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed at
least three times the pony's value in those pans. It proved to be a bony,
underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying just yet.

Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence
as some compensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man, and
well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but thirty silver pennies was a
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear.

Asa matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned
out later that only one horse had been actually stolen. The others had been
driven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different
corners of the Bree-land. Merry's ponies had escaped altogether, and
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a
while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom's
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very
fair price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well; so
on the whole they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But
they never came to Rivendell.

However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone
for good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there was a great
commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir and heard news of the




raid on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed
the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number had
also disappeared in the night, none other than Bill Ferny's suint-eyed
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once.

'If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,' said
Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves and not
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it
appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had
joined their party.

After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together
further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It was
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of
the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that
Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as
would last for many uneventful years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and
Staddle, and many even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road
to

see the travellers start. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or
hanging out of the windows.

Strider had changed his mind, and he decided to leave Bree by the main
road. Any attempt to set off across country at once would only make matters
worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were up to,
and to prevent them from trespassing.

They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with
many thanks. 'I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry
once more,' said Frodo. 'I should like nothing better than to stay in your
house in peace for a while.'

They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was
laden with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but
already it looked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its
fortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of
them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe




for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.'

The hobbits took no notice of the inuisitive heads that peeped out of
doors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But as they drew
near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick
hedge: the last house in the village. In one of the windows he caught a
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once.

'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more
than half like a goblin.'

Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy black
brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in a sneer. He was
smoking a short black pipe. As they approached he took it out of his mouth
and spat.

'Morning, Longshanks!' he said. 'Off early? Found some friends at
last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer. 'Morning, my little friends!' he
said to the others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken up with? That's
Stick -at-naught Strider, that is! Though I've heard other names not so
pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don't go ill-treating my poor
old pony! Pah!' He spat again.

Sam turned uickly. 'And you. Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out
of sight, or it will get hurt.' With a sudden flick, uick as lightning, an
apple left his hand and hit Bill suare on the nose. He ducked too late, and
curses came from behind the hedge. 'Waste of a good apple,' said Sam
regretfully, and strode on.

At last they left the village behind. The escort of children and
stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned back at the
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some miles. It
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet
of Bree-hill, and then it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit -holes of
Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill; down in a deep
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising smoke that showed
where Combe lay;

Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.

After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standing
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards the
North. 'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,' said Strider.

'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said Pippin. 'Our last short cut through




woods nearly ended in disaster.'

'Ah, but you had not got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,
short or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one
was in sight; and he led the way uickly down towards the wooded valley.

His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the
country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on
the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands to
Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well, cut off a great
loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater
Marshes. But, of course, they would have to pass through the marshes
themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging.

However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed, if it
had not been for the disturbing events of the night before, they would have
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was
shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and
full of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider guided them
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they
would soon have been at a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many
turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit.

'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,' he
said; 'though I don't think he will follow us himself. He knows the land
round here well enough, but he knows he is not a match for me in a wood. It
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far
away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.'

Whether because of Strider's skill or for some other reason, they saw
no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day: neither
two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and a few
suirrels. The next day they began to steer a steady course eastwards; and
still all was uiet and peaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came
out of the Chetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since they
turned aside from the Road, and they now entered a wide flat expanse of
country, much more difficult to manage. They were far beyond the borders of
the Bree-land, out in the pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the
Midge- water Marshes.

The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they
came upon pools, and wide stretches of reeds and rushes filled with the
warbling of little hidden birds. They had to pick their way carefully to




keep both dry-footed and on their proper course. At first they made
fan-progress, but as they went on, their passage became slower and more
dangerous. The marshes were bewildering and treacherous, and there was no
permanent trail even for Rangers to find through their shifting uagmires.

The flies began to torment them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny
midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair.

'I am being eaten alive!' cried Pippin. 'Midgewater! There are more
midges than water!'

'What do they live on when they can't get hobbit?' asked Sam,
scratching his neck.

They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their
camping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the biting insects
would not let them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the
reeds and tussocks that from the sound of them were evil relatives of the
cricket. There were thousands of them, and they sueaked all round,
neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the hobbits were
nearly frantic.

The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost as
comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them) had been left
behind, the midges still pursued them.

As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that
far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it flashed and faded many
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.

'What is the light?' he said to Strider, who had risen, and was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.

'I do not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make out. It
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.'

Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.

They had not gone far on the fifth day when they left the last
straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land before
them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could
now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the right of the line
and a little separated from the others. It had a conical top, slightly
flattened at the summit.

'That is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road, which we have left




far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far from its
foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I
suppose we had better do so.'

’What do you mean?' asked Frodo.

'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It
is close to the Road.'

'But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?'

'Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not
pass through Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And anyway,
unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find
us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It
commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there are many birds and beasts in
this country that could see us, as we stand here, from that hill-top. Not
all the birds are to be trusted, and there are other spies more evil than
they are.'

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright
unfriendly eyes. 'You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!'
he said.

'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo.

'I think,' answered Strider slowly, as if he was not uite sure, 'I
think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can, to
make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I
know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.'

All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early evening came
down. The land became drier and more barren; but mists and vapours lay
behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy birds were piping and wailing,
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then an empty
silence fell. The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunset glancing
through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away.

At the day's end they came to a stream that wandered down from the
hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its
banks while the light lasted. It was already night when at last they halted
and made their camp under some stunted alder -trees by the shores of the
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and treeless




backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did
not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night -hours a cold
grey light lay on the land.

Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a frost
in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed,
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used
to much walking on short commons - shorter at any rate than what in the
Shire they would have thought barely enough to keep them on their legs.
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been.

'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will not go on
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'

'Do not speak of such things!' said Strider uickly, and with
surprising earnestness.

The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, often rising
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or
passes leading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins of old works of stone.

By night they had reached the feet of the westward slopes, and there they
camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, and they were six days out
from Bree.

In the morning they found, for the first time since they had left the
Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed it
southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep
as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of
the flats to the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there
were lines of large boulders and hewn stones that screened the travellers
almost like a hedge.

'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked
along one of these avenues, where the stones were unusually large and
closely set. 'I am not sure that I like it: it has a - well, rather a
barrow- wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?'

'No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,'
answered Strider. 'The Men of the West did not live here; though in their
latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil that came




out of Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along the walls. But
long before, in the first days of the North Kingdom, they built a great
watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Syl they called it. It was burned and
broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown
on the old hill's head. Yet once it was tall and fair. It is told that
Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in
the days of the Last Alliance.'

The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old
lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry;
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low
voice murmured:

Gil-galad was an Elven-king.

Of him the harpers sadly sing:

the last whose realm was fair and free

between the Mountains and the Sea.

His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;
the countless stars of heaven's field
were mirrored in his silver shield.

But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are.

The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's.

'Don't stop!' said Merry.

'That's all I know,' stammered Sam, blushing. 'I learned it from Mr.

Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I
was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my
letters. He was mighty book -learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote
poetry. He wrote what I have just said.'

'He did not make it up,' said Strider. 'It is pan of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have
translated it. I never knew that.'

'There was a lot more,' said Sam, 'all about Mordor. I didn't learn
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way




myself!'

’Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!'

'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider.

It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the
path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October sun, a
grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the
hill They decided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad
Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only hope that no enemy
or spy was observing them. Nothing was to be seen moving on the hill. If
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him.

On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at
the bottom of which there was a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky.

On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a
cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with fire.
About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the
grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but
there was no sign of any living thing.

Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round below
them a wide prospect, for the most pan of lands empty and featureless,
except for patches of woodland away to the south, beyond which they caught
here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern
side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road, coming out of the West and
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east.
Nothing was moving on it. Following its line eastward with their eyes they
saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre;

behind them stood taller shapes of grey, and behind those again were
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds.

'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very cheerless and uninviting it
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.'

'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first. He can ride




very swiftly when need presses.’ Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone
on the top of the cairn; it was flatter than the others, and whiter, as if
it had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning it in his
fingers. "This has been handled recently,' he said. 'What do you think of
these marks?'

On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: 'There seems to he a
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said.

'The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,' said
Strider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean
something uite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use
runes, and they come here sometimes.'

'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry

'I should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were a
sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now.

It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he
had no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is
so, we must be wary.'

'I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they may
mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the
way, in front of us or behind us.'

'Perhaps,' said Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was here, and
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that
we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess
that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell.

He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own
way to Rivendell, as best we can '

'How far is Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The world
looked wild and wide from Weathertop.

'I don't know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond the
Forsaken Inn, a day's journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad
to reach their journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know
how long it would take me on my own feet, with fair weather and no ill
fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses
the Loudwater that runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight's
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.'




'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.'

'It may,' said Strider.

They stood for a while silent on the hill -top, near its southward edge.

In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in
the uiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful Road, leading
back westward - to his home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks
were moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched
Strider's arm.

'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.

At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.

'What is it?' he whispered.

'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider.

Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered
through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer bright,
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now
overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They could all see the black
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain;
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill.

'Yes,' said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. 'The
enemy is here!'

Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to
find their companions.

Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small dell
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring of clear water
in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a day or two old. In
the dell itself they found recent traces of a fire, and other signs of a
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to
the hill. Behind them Sam came upon a small store of firewood neatly
stacked.

'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.'

Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. 'I wish I had
waited and explored the ground down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to




the spring to examine the footprints.

'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back. 'Sam and Pippin
have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers
have been here lately. It is they who left the firewood behind. But there
are also several newer tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one
set was made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot
now be certain, but I think there were many booted feet.' He paused and
stood in anxious thought.

Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted
Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner Strider led
them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike,
now that he had heard news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles
away.

'Hadn't we better clear out uick, Mr. Strider?' he asked impatiently.

'It is getting late, and I don't like this hole: it makes my heart sink
somehow.'

'Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,' answered Strider,
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at
last, 'I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere
better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight
for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen
spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is
here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to
take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.'

'Can the Riders see ?' asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem usually to have
used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the
right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you
saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.'

'I was too careless on the hill-top,' answered Strider. 'I was very
anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us
to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the
Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They
themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast
shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark
they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us: then they are




most to be feared. And at all times they smell the blood of living things,
desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We
can feel their presence - it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here,
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his
voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.'

'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!'

Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said.

'You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the fire as
a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but fire shall serve for
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can all things, but these
Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it. Fire is our friend in
the wilderness.'

'Maybe,' muttered Sam. 'It is also as good a way of saying "here we
are" as I can think of, bar shouting.'

Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit a
fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of evening began to fall, and it grew
cold. They were suddenly aware of great hunger, for they had not eaten
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.
The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly places
deserted by all the races of the world. Rangers passed at times beyond the
hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys of
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their own, and with no help and few
words to spare for strangers.

'I don't see how our food can be made to last,' said Frodo. 'We have
been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but
we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and
perhaps more.'

'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry, root, and herb; and
I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work,
and we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables
of Elrond's house!'

The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from the edge of
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing uickly into




shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling
stars. Frodo and his companions huddled round the fire, wrapped in every
garment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was content with a single
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe.

As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out brightly he
began to tell them tales to keep their minds from fear. He knew many
histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the good and evil
deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he was, and where he had
learned all this lore.

Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at the end
of a story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you know any more of that old lay that
you spoke of?'

'I do indeed,' answered Strider. 'So also does Frodo, for it concerns
us closely.' Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring into the
fire.

'I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,' said Frodo slowly.
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is
Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land
of '

'No!' said Strider interrupting, 'I do not think that tale should be
told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.'

'Then tell us some other tale of the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale
about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.'

'I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel,' said Strider, 'in brief - for
it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now,
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may
lift up your hearts.' He was silent for some time, and then he began not to
speak but to chant softly:

The leaves were long, the grass was green,

The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,

And in the glade a light was seen

Of stars in shadow shimmering.

Tin®viel was dancing there

To music of a pipe unseen,




And light of stars was in her hair,

And in her raiment glimmering.

There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,

And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.

He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wander flowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,

And her hair like shadow following.

Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;

And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She tightly fled on dancing feet,

And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.

He heard there oft the flying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,

Or music welling underground,

In hidden hollows uavering.

Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.

He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.

Her mantle glinted in the moon,

As on a hill-top high and far

She danced, and at her feet was strewn




A mist of silver uivering.



When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain,

And melting water bubbling.

He saw the elven-flowers spring
About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling.

Again she fled, but swift he came.
Tin®viel! Tin®viel!

He called her by her elvish name;

And there she halted listening.

One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came,

And doom fell on Tin®viel
That in his arms lay glistening.

As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair,

The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tin®viel the elven-fair,

Immortal maiden elven-wise,

About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering.

Long was the way that fate them bore,
O'er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,

And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.




Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ’That is a song,' he
said, 'in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves, but is hard
to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells
of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was a
mortal man, but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol, a King of Elves upon
Middle-earth when the world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that
has ever been among all the children of this world. As the stars above the
mists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a
shining light. In those days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was
but a servant, dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West
coming back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils which
he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the Enemy was
victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the
forest of Neldoreth. There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade
beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; and he named her Tin®viel, that is
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and
they were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron,
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great
Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron crown one of the three
Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the bride-price of L®thien to
Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came
from the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of Tin®viel. But she
chose mortality, and to die from the world, so that she might follow him;
and it is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed,
long ago, beyond the confines of this world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have
lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of
old descended among Men. There live still those of whom L®thien was the
foremother, and it is said that her line shall never fail. Elrond of
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and L®thien was born Dior Thingol’s
heir; and of him Elwing the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril
upon his brow. And of Edrendil came the Kings of N®menor, that is
Westernesse.'

As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit




in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and
deep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over
the crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon was climbing
slowly

above the hill that overshadowed them, and the stars above the hill-top
faded.

The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said Merry.
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.'

The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the top of the
hill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moonrise. It was
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light.

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin
remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill
intently. All seemed uiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping
over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell.

'I don't know what it is,' he said, 'but I suddenly felt afraid. I
durstn't go outside this dell for any money; I felt that something was
creeping up the slope.'

'Did you see anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet.

'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.'

'I saw something,' said Merry; 'or I thought I did - away westwards
where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the
hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be
moving this way.'

'Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!'

For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their
backs turned to the wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night.
Frodo

stirred, feeling that he must break the silence: he longed to shout out
aloud.

'Hush!' whispered Strider. 'What's that?' gasped Pippin at the same
moment.

Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they
felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one. They




strained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon there could be no
doubt:

three or four tall black figures were standing there on the slope,
looking down on them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo thought that he heard a faint hiss as
of venomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly
advanced.

Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he was uaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was
swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Fie did not forget
the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be
compelling him to disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. Fie could not speak. Fie
felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.

Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and dark,
the shapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath their black
wrappings. There were five tall figures: two standing on the lip of the
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes;
under their mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs were helms
of silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel. Their eyes fell on
him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he drew his own
sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand.

Two of the figures halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair
was long and gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a
long sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that held
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo.

At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heard
himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at
the feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a
pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping




out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last
effort Frodo, dropping his sword, slipped the Ring from his finger and
closed his right hand tight upon it.




Chapter 12 . Flight to the Ford



When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.

He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending over him. 'What has happened? Where is the
pale king?' he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to
answer for a while; nor did they understand his uestion. At length he
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes
coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the
grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now a good while
ago.

Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side.

'I am not a Black Rider, Sam,' he said gently, 'nor in league with
them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I
have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do not attack
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.'

When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern, and
shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it.

'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and
walked away, and called Sam to him. 'I think I understand things better
now,' he said in a low voice. 'There seem only to have been five of the
enemy. Why they were not all here, I don't know; but I don't think they
expected to be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not
far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost
accomplished, and that the Ring cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that




they believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue him to their
will. We shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't despair!' said Strider.

'You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had
guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and
I think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his enemies
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness.

Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and a
deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His
friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night
passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.

'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black cloak
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there
was a slash. 'This was the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish
that pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of
Elbereth.'

'And more deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw
that near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But
even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only
the hilt in Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he cried. 'It was this accursed knife
that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil
weapons. But I will do what I can.'

He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger -hilt laid it on his
knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it
aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could
not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a
plant.

'These leaves,' he said, 'I have walked far to find; for this plant
does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the Road
I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his
fingers, and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It is fortunate
that I could find it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West
brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it grows now sparsely




and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old; and it is not known
in the North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It has great
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.'

He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some power over the wound, for
Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his side;
but the life did not return to his arm, and he could not raise or use his
hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness, and reproached himself for
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he
would remain maimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue
their journey. He fell too weak to stand.

The others were discussing this very uestion. They uickly decided to
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any
case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.'

As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the greater
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo on the pony. In
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters,
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must have been very hard for the
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life.

They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the
Road, but. it was the uickest way to more wooded country. And they needed
fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night,
while fire would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan to
shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards.

They made their way slowly and cautiously round the south-western
slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of the Road.

There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were hurrying across they
heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering.
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The




land before them sloped away southwards, but it was wild and pathless;
bushes and stunted trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in
between. The grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the
thickets were faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey
was slow and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down,
and

their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and
heavy-hearted.

Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again,
but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four days passed, without the
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop
slowly

sank, and before them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer. Yet
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked
their flight or followed them. They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch
in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud- veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did they
feel the sense of present evil that had assailed them before the attack in
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already lost their
trail again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in a narrow
place?

At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to rise slowly
out of the wide shallow valley into which they had descended. Strider now
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of
the hills; and to their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin
sunshine. In the distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley
half-veiled in mist.

"I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,' said
Strider. 'We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call
Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of
Rivendell, and joins the Loud water away in the South. Some call it the
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is
no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last




Bridge on which the Road crosses.'

’What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry.

'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,' answered Strider. 'The
Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the
Ford of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we shall cross that water.
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last
Bridge held against us.'

Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders of
the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found no sign of any
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see.

They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope.
They dreaded to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider
made them take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he went
forward to explore.

Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he
said, 'and I wonder very much what that means. But I have found something
very strange.'

He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it
in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,' he said. 'It is a beryl, an
elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I cannot say;
but it brings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we may pass the
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road, without some clearer
token.'

At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety, hearing
no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the
steep lands on the left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon
they were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of
sullen hills.

The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here and there upon
heights and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and the
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, who was not walking, had




time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey
and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo
guessed that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance
they would pass near the spot.

'Who lives in this land?' he asked. 'And who built these towers? Is
this troll-country?'

'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land.

Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil
people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all
were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But
that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow
still lies on the land.'

'Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that
son.'

'The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,' said Strider;

'and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell.' 'Have
you often been to Rivendell?' said Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt
there once, and still I return when I may.

There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the
fair house of Elrond.'

The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to
the River Bruinen, but both were now hidden from view. The travellers came
into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes
of pine-wood.

The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled
rocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing for Frodo's sake, and
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.

They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind
began to blow steadily out of the West and pour the water of the distant
seas on the dark heads of the hills in fine drenching rain. By nightfall
they were all soaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get
any fire to burn. The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper
before them, and they were forced to turn away northwards out of their




course. Strider seemed to be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out
from Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It
went on raining.

That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock -wall behind them,
in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff. Frodo was
restless. The cold and wet had made his wound more painful than ever, and
the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks
of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened
stone. He felt that black shapes were advancing to smother him; but when he
sat up he saw nothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking
his pipe, and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream,
in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed
faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking
over the hedge.

In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped. The clouds
were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue appeared
between them. The wind was shifting again. They did not start early.
Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he
came back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie
of the land.

When he returned he was not reassuring. 'We have come too far to the
north,' he said, 'and we must find some way to turn back southwards again.

If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north
of Rivendell. That is troll-country, and little known to me. We could
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but
it would take too long, for I do not know the way, and our food would not
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.'

The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground. They
found a passage between two hills that led them into a valley running
south-east, the direction that they wished to take; but towards the end of
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark
edge against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it.

They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so they




often despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed of finding a path for
themselves, burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They had climbed on to a
narrow saddle between two higher points, and the land fell steeply away
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt
as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him seemed
shadowy and dim.

'We cannot go any further,' said Merry to Strider. 'I am afraid this
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we
to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Ri vendell, if we ever
get there?'

'We shall see,' answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do
in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.'

'What is the matter with my master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking
appealingly at Strider. 'His wound was small, and it is already closed.

There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.'

'Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,' said Strider,

'and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!'

Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire down under
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as
if stone had once been uarried there. They sat huddled together. The wind
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning
and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought
him in all the hollows of the hill s.

The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the light
pale and clear in a rain- washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey
longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light,
Strider took Merry with him and went to survey the country from the height
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining brightly when he
returned with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the
right direction. If they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a
glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from




view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side
nearest to them.

'We must make for the Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only
way to the Ford.'

As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed slowly down
the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier than they had
expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side, and before long
Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an
unexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many
jolts as possible. The spirits of the party rose again. Even Frodo felt
better in the morning light, but every now and again a mist seemed to
obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes.

Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned round and
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried.

When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake:

there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed with many
windings out of the woods below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In
places it was now faint and overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used. It was a path made
by strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there old trees had been cut or
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way.

They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came
into the dark woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming
out of a belt of fir-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply
to the left round the comer of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came
to the comer they looked round and saw that the path ran on over a level
strip under the face of a low cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.

Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber
behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and
Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little
wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance
except some great empty jars and broken pots.

'Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!' said Pippin.




’Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made the path -
and

we had better get off it uick.’

'There is no need, I think,' said Strider, coining out. 'It is
certainly a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don't
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.'

The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and
Strider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone
very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both
looked terrified.

'There are trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not
far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They are very
large!'

'We will come and look at them,' said Strider, picking up a stick.

Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.

The sun was now high, and it shone down through the half-stripped
branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of light.

They halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the tree-trunks,
holding their breath. There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One was
stooping, and the other two stood staring at him.

Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and
broke his stick upon the stooping troll.

Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits,
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said. 'We are forgetting our family
history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf,
uarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.'

'I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew
the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact
he had never more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them
to life again.

'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew
about trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with a bright sun, and
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live trolls waiting for




us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a
live troll!'

They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm
and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little.
They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs.

'Won't somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't had a song or a tale for days.'

'Not since Weathertop,' said Frodo. The others looked at him. 'Don't
worry about me!' he added. 'I feel much better, but I don't think I could
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.'

'Come on, Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more stored in your head than you
let on about.'

'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But
these old images here brought it to my mind.' Standing up, with his hands
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune.

Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,

And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;

For many a year he had gnawed it near,

For meat was hard to come by.

Done by! Gum by!

In a case in the hills he dwelt alone,

And meat was hard to come by.

Up came Tom with his big boots on.

Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon?

For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim,

As should be a-lyin ' in graveyard.

Caveyard! Paveyard!

This many a year has Tim been gone,

And I thought he were lyin ' in graveyard. '



'My lad, ' said Troll, 'this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?




Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead,

Afore I found his shinbone.

Tinbone! Thinbone!

He can spare a share for a poor old troll,

For he don't need his shinbone. '

Said Tom: 7 don't see why the likes o' thee
Without axin ' leave should go makin 'free
With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin;
So hand the old bone over!

Rover! Trover!

Though dead he be, it belongs to he;

So hand the old bone over!'

'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins,
'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.

A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet!

I'll try my teeth on thee now.

Hee now! See now!

I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins;

I've a mind to dine on thee now. '

But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.

Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to lam him.

Warn him! Darn him!

A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to lam him.

But harder than stone is the flesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.

As well set your boot to the mountain's root,
For the seat of a troll don 't feel it.

Peel it! Heal it!

Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.




Tom's leg is game, since home he came,

And his bootless foot is lasting lame;

But Troll don't care, and he's still there

With the bone he boned from its owner.

Doner! Boner!

Troll's old seat is still the same,

And the bone he boned from its owner!

'Well, that's a warning to us all!' laughed Merry. 'It is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!'

'Where did you come by that, Sam?' asked Pippin. 'I've never heard
those words before.'

Sam muttered something inaudible. 'It's out of his own head, of
course,' said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.
First he was a conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by becoming a
wizard - or a warrior!'

'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!'

In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably
following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many
years before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank
above the Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford
and

the Mountains. Not far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the
grass. On it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen
dwarf-runes and secret marks.

'There!' said Merry. 'That must be the stone that marked the place
where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo's share, I
wonder, Frodo?'

Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought home no
treasure more perilous, nor less easy to pan with. 'None at all,' he said.

'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it
came from robbers.'

The Road lay uiet under the long shadows of early evening. There was
no sign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no other
possible course for them to take, they climbed down the bank, and turning




left went off as fast as they could. Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off
the light of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to meet them
from the mountains ahead.

They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where they
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought sudden fear
back into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them. They looked back,
but they could not see far because of the many windings and rollings of the
Road. As uickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light, some
thirty feel below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They were going
fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly, as if it was blown
away from them by the breeze, they seemed to catch a dim ringing, as of
small bells tinkling.

That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening
intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not, but they all
remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long
that any sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was
now leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a
look of joy on his face.

The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came the uick trotting
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming in the shadows,
running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall flickered and flashed, as if it
were studded with gems like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in the
wind of his speed. To Frodo it appeared that a white light was shining
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.

Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road, leaping
with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved or called, the
rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up towards the thicket
where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear
ringing

voice left no doubt in their hearts: the rider was of the Elven-folk. No
others that dwelt in the wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there




seemed to be a note of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was
now speaking uickly and urgently to Strider.

Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes and
hurried down to the Road. 'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of
Elrond,' said Strider.

'Hail, and well met at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I was sent
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the
road.'

'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully.

'No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered
Glorfindel. 'Elrond received news that troubled him. Some of my kindred,
journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,* learned that things were
amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the Nine
were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a great burden without
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that
can ride openly against the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out
north, west, and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.

'It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of
Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of the
servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and I pursued
them westward. I came also upon two others, but they turned away southward.
Since then I have searched for your trail. Two days ago I found it, and
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here
we must risk the peril of the Road and go. There are five behind us, and
when they find your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the
wind. And they are not all. Where the other four may be, I do not know. I
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.'

While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened. Frodo
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began to sink the
mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a shadow was coming
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm.

'My master is sick and wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He can't go on
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.'

Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently




in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety.

Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop, and
of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at
it.

'There are evil things written on this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe
your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach the house of
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can - but all the
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.'

He searched the wound on Frodo's shoulder with his fingers, and his
face grew graver, as if what he learned disuieted him. But Frodo felt the
chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed
to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his
friends' faces more clearly again, and a measure of new hope and strength
returned.

'You shall ride my horse,' said Glorfindel. 'I will shorten the
stirrups up to the saddle-skins, and you must sit as tight as you can. But
you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him
to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger presses too near, he
will bear you away with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy
cannot rival.'

'No, he will not!' said Frodo. 'I shall not ride him, if I am to be
carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in
danger.'

Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would
be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and
leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that
brings us all in peril.'

To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's
white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed;
but the hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless
feet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, and still on
under the deep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that




time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream.

They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards from the
road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to have closed
their eyes when Glorfindel, who had set himself to watch while they slept,
awoke them again. The sun had now climbed far into the morning, and the
clouds and mists of the night were gone.

'Drink this!' said Glorfindel to them, pouring for each in turn a
little liuor from his silver-studded flask of leather. It was clear as
spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel either cool or warm in
the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs as
they drank it. Eaten after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.

They had rested rather less than five hours when they took to the Road
again. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts
during the day's march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before
nightfall, and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down
towards the bottom of the valley, now making straight for the Bruinen. So
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or
hear; but often Glorfindel would halt and listen for a moment, if they
lagged behind, and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue.

But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs. Frodo's
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows of
ghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for then the world
seemed less pale and empty.

The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early next
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and
they

hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage.

'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,' said
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'

The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now in




places much grass at either side, in which the hobbits walked when they
could, to ease their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a place
where the Road went suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes
ran along as they hurried forward; and there seemed to be a sound of many
footfalls following their own. All at once, as if through a gate of light,
the Road ran out again from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at
the bottom of a sharp incline they saw before them a long flat mile, and
beyond that the Ford of Rivendell. On the further side was a steep brown
bank, threaded by a winding path; and behind that the tall mountains
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky.

There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind
them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through the
branches of the pines. One moment Glorfindel turned and listened, then he
sprang forward with a loud cry.

'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!’

The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope.
Glorfindel and Strider followed as rear -guard. They were only half way
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of
the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined
his horse in, and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and
then another; then again two more.

’Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo.

He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking
the horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders seemed to sit
upon their great steeds like threatening statues upon a hill, dark and
solid, while all the woods and land about them receded as if into a mist.
Suddenly he knew in his heart that they were silently commanding him to
wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it.

'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called
to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth!

At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along the
last lap of the Road. At the same moment the black horses leaped down the
hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had
heard filling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out from the trees and




rocks away on the left four other Riders came flying. Two rode towards
Frodo: two galloped madly towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as
their courses converged with his.

Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer
see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great
steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He
looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the
Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black
cloaks, and they were robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they
called to him with fell voices.

Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No
cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse's mane. The wind
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a
flash of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed right
before the face of the foremost Rider.

Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the
uick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford.

But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horse
halted and turned about neighing fiercely. There were Nine Riders at the
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit uailed before the threat of their
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing as
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt.
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.

Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked at
the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and
brandished his sword.

'Go back!' he cried. 'Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me no
more! ' His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders
halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him
with a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To




Mordor we will take you!'

’Go back!' he whispered.

The Ring! The Ring!' they cried with deadly voices; and immediately
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two
others.

'By Elbereth and L®thien the Fair,' said Frodo with a last effort,
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!'

Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in
his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his
tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring. His sword broke and
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore.

At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of loud
waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and
down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of waves. White flames
seemed to Frodo to flicker on their crests and he half fancied that he saw
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three
Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they
disappeared, buried suddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew
back in dismay.

With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to him
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure
of white light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms waving flames, that
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world.

The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forward in
terror they bore their riders into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo
felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.




* BOOK II *



Chapter 1 . Many Meetings

Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that he
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge
of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of a
waterfall.

'Where am I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the ceiling. 'In
the House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in the morning.' said a voice.

'It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.'

'Gandalf!' cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.

'Yes,' he said, 'I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.' Frodo lay down
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did
not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now,
and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut'
through the Old Forest the 'accident' at The Prancing Pony ; and his madness
in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his
arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft
puffs of Gandalf s pipe, as he blew white smoke -rings out of the window.

'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?'

'Yes, they are all safe and sound,' answered Gandalf. 'Sam was here
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.'

'What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. 'It all seemed so dim somehow;
and it still does.’

'Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,' answered Gandalf. 'The
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have
been

beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you
showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous




moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.'

'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. 'I have not spoken
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?'

'You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and
it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry!
Though I said "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and
of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such
dangers, still bearing the Ring.'

'We should never have done it without Strider,' said Frodo. 'But we
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.'

'I was delayed,' said Gandalf, 'and that nearly proved our ruin. And
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.'

'I wish you would tell me what happened!'

'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything
today, by Elrond's orders.'

'But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are uite as
tiring,’ said Frodo. ’I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things
that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at
least.'

'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have
a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say
that I was held captive.'

'You?' cried Frodo.

'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,' said the wizard solemnly. 'There are many
powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater than I am.
Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!'

'Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?’

'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings. But
I did not know that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at
once. I heard news of them only after I left you in June; but that story
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.'

'Yes,' said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of
him at first. Sam never uite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we
met Glorfindel.'




Gandalf smiled. V I have heard all about Sam,' he said. 'He has no more
doubts now.'

'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange,
and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that
any of the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked
like Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except
perhaps the Breelanders.'

'You don't know much even about them, if you think old Barliman is
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less
than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as
they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.'

'Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder. 'I thought they had all vanished long ago. I
thought he was only a Ranger.'

'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. 'My dear Frodo, that is just what the
Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of
the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the
days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at
rest.'

'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But so far my only thought has been to
get here; and I hope I shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has
been as much as I want.'

He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have
been reckoning,' he said, 'and I can't bring the total up to October the
twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-first. We must have reached the
Ford by the twentieth.'

'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.
'How do the side and shoulder feel now?’

’I don't know.' Frodo answered. 'They don't feel at all: which is an
improvement, but'— he made an effort— 'I can move my arm again a little.
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left
hand with his right.




'Good!' said Gandalf. "It is mending fast. You will soon be sound
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were
brought in.'

'Days?' said Frodo.

'Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought you
from this where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has
hardly left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a
master of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the
truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last
night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply buried, and it was
working inwards.'

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that
had vanished in Strider's hands. 'Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf. 'It is
gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would
uickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen
days.’

'What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. 'What were the Riders
trying to do?’

'They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains in
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like they are, only
weaker and under their command. You would have became a wraith under
the

dominion of the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you for trying to
keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it
and seeing it on his hand.'

'Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!' said Frodo
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!'

'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf, 'not to mention
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced;
and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow
shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for
then you were half in the wraith- world yourself, and they might have seized
you. You could see them, and they could see you.’

'I know,' said Frodo. 'They were terrible to behold! But why could we




all see their horses?'

'Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes
that they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have dealings
with the living.'

'Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other animals
are terrified when they draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel. The
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’

'Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are ores and
trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are
many Men, warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet are
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.’

'What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’

'Yes, at present, until all else is conuered. The Elves may fear the
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never again will they listen to
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still some of his chief
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the Blessed Realm
live at once in both worlds, and against both the Seen and the Unseen they
have great power.'

'I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?'

'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the
mighty of the Firstborn. Lie is an Elf-lord of a house of princes. Indeed
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while:
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind
in the Shire. But all such places will soon become islands under siege, if
things go on as they are going. The Dark Lord is putting forth all his
strength.

'Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin, while
his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, 'we must keep up our
courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to death. You are in
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.'

'I haven't any courage to keep up,' said Frodo, 'but I am not worried
at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me the end of the
affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be content for the
present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan't be




able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.'

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo.

The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were clear, and fully
awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed to be little wrong with
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were
of transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay
outside upon the coverlet.

'Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. 'He is not half
through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can
foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a
clear light for eyes to see that can.'

'You look splendid,' he said aloud. 'I will risk a brief tale without
consulting Elrond. But uite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again.
This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders made straight for
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any
longer: you had become visible to them, being already on the threshold of
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save
you, if the white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake,
and too many to oppose. On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could
not with stand all the Nine at once.

'When the Ring wraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind. Close to
the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted
trees. There they hastily kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood
would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have to
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the flood
appeared, he rushed out, followed by Aragorn and the. others with flaming
brands. Caught between fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness.
Three were carried away by the first assault of the flood; the others were
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.'

'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo.

'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished, and without them
they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so easily
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your
friends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on your
face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under you. The horse was




standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold, and they feared that you
were dead, or worse. Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards
Ri vendell. '

'Who made the flood?' asked Frodo.

'Elrond commanded it,' answered Gandalf. 'The river of this valley is
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the
Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the
flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you
may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white
horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding
boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is
great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty
Mountains.'

'Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: 'the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But
now we are safe!'

Gandalf looked uickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. 'Yes, you
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to
celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in
places of honour.'

'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble
and show me so much kindness.’

'Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf, smiling.

'I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.’

'Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. 'I wonder where he is. I wish he was
here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow
jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast
asleep.

Frodo was now safe in the Fast Homely House east of the Sea. That house
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or
a pleasant mixture of them all'. Merely to be there was a cure for
weariness, fear, and sadness.

As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that he no




longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and
probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and
discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had
been. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that fitted him
excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinner
reflection of himself than he remembered: it looked remarkably like the
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire;
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully.

'Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!'

He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune.

At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran
to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently
and then he blushed and turned hastily away.

'Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.

'It's warm!' said Sam. 'Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.'

'I am ready,' said Frodo. 'Let's go and look for the rest of the
party!'

'I can take you to them, sir,' said Sam. 'It's a big house this, and
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you'll
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like
kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.'

'I know what you have been doing, Sam,' said Frodo, taking his arm.
'But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come
on, guide me round the corners!'

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a
high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting
in a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the
valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far
above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud,
and the evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers, as if




summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.

'Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing up. 'Here is our noble cousin! Make
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!'

'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. 'Evil
things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of
Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’

'Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said Pippin.

'He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to
feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the
right song for the occasion.’

'I feel like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. 'Though at the moment I
feel more like eating and drinking!’

'That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. 'You have shown your usual
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’

'More than meal! A feast!’ said Merry. 'As soon as Gandalf reported
that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had hardly finished
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells.

The hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves for the most
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.

Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of
whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were
revealed

as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other
two; but his long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged
face under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could
leap suddenly into fire.

Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in his hand was
strength.

The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was




written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark
as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale
as a tried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men.

In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall,
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look upon,
and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that
she was one of his close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids
of her dark hair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face
were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes,
grey as a cloudless night; yet ueenly she looked, and thought and knowledge
were in her glance, as of one who has known many things that the years
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver.

So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen,
daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of L®thien had
come on earth again; and she was called Undumiel, for she was the Evenstar
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin, in Lurien
beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her
father's house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon
errantry: for they rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North,
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the ores.

Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find that he
had a seat at Elrond' s table among all these folk so high and fair. Though
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very
small, and rather out of place; but that feeling uickly passed. The feast
was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours.

He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper
end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of
Strider.




Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as white as the
snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him.

'Welcome and well met!' said the dwarf, turning towards him. Then he
actually rose from his seat and bowed. 'Gluin at your service,' he said, and
bowed still lower.

'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family's,' said Frodo
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. 'Am I right in
guessing that you are the Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the great
Thorin Oaken shield?'

'Quite right,' answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. 'And I do not ask, for I
have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.'

'Thank you very much,’ said Frodo.

'You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,' said Gluin. 'I
wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like
it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inuire
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?'

'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,' said Frodo
politely.

He guessed that even in Elrond's house the matter of the Ring was not
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles for a
time. 'But I am eually curious,' he added, 'to learn what brings so
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'

Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I think we will not speak
yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long, I believe,
and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that may be
told.'

Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring,
seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Gluin had much to tell of
events in the northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn
the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither ore nor wolf dared to go.

'Indeed,' said Gluin, 'if it were not for the Beornings, the passage




from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible. They are
valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock. But their
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his head; 'and like Beorn of old
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that is much
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of
Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman
rules them, Brand son of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.'

'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo.

'There is much to tell, good and bad,' said Gluin; 'yet it is mostly
good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow of
these times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you tidings
gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves' tongues run on when
speaking of their handiwork, they say.'

And with that Gluin embarked on a long account of the doings of the
Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a listener; for
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject,
though actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of people
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to
hear that Dbin was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having
passed his two hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich.

Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven were
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him.

'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo.

A shadow passed over Gluin's face. 'We do not know,' he answered. 'It
is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!'

Gluin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. 'We have done
well,' he said. 'But in metalwork we cannot rival our fathers, many of
whose, secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot
again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should
see the waterways of Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You
should see the stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and




cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the
terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we
have not been idle.’

'I will come and see them, if ever I can,' said Frodo. 'How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!'

Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you
not?' he asked.

'Yes,' answered Frodo. 1 would rather see him than all the towers and
palaces in the world.'

At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down
the hall, and the company followed them in due order. The doors were thrown
open, and they went across a wide passage and through other doors, and came
into a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side.

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. 'This is the Hall of Fire'
said the wizard. 'Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and uiet, and people
come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all
the year round, but there is little other light.'

As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him, elvish
minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo
looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together;
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly
he noticed, not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on the
ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was
ill

(if people were ever ill in Ri vendell), and had been unable to come to the
feast. His head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark
cloak was drawn over his face.

Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. 'Awake little
master, he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him.
'Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo,' he said.
'Here is a friend that you have long missed.'

The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face.

'Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward.

'Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. 'So you have got here at last. I




hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?'

'Why weren't you there?' cried Frodo. 'And why haven't I been allowed
to see you before?'

'Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by
your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast' I don't go in for such
things much now. And I had something else to do.'

'What were you doing?’

'Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this is
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said, cocking an
eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness
that Frodo could see. 'Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want
to know, you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you have
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or
two, and was thinking about them; but now I don't suppose I shall ever get
them right. There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be
driven clean out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to
help me. Where is he?'

Elrond laughed. 'He shall be found,' he said. 'Then you two shall go
into a corner and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast.

In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came uickly
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious
of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of
himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the
Road or in the country on either side; but somehow he had steered all the
time towards Ri vendell. 'I got here without much adventure,' he said, 'and
after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't
travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I
have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of my book.
And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to
please me, I think; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just
is. A remarkable place altogether.

'I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the
South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard about the Ring, of




course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a great deal,
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a pity that
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I could have brought the thing here
myself long ago without so much trouble. I have thought several times of
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let
me: Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me

tottering about in the Wild.

'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good
to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again." Odd sort of
remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let
things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound.' He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully.

'Have you got it here?' he asked in a whisper. I can't help feeling
curious, you know, after all I've heard. I should very much like just to
peep at it again.'

'Yes, I've got it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. 'It
looks just the same as ever it did.'

'Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo.

When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring had been
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo uickly drew back the Ring. To his
distress and amazement he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a
shadow seemed to have fallen between them, and through it he found himself
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.
He felt a desire to strike him.

The music and singing round them seemed to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked uickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. 'I
understand now,' he said. 'Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in
for this burden: sorry about everything. Don't adventures ever have an end?

I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't
be helped. I wonder if it's any good trying to finish my book? But don't
let's worry about it now-let's have some real News! Tell me all about the
Shire!'

Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred




of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him again. Bilbo
smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo
could tell-aided and corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest
interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the
smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so deep in the doings of the Four
Farthings that they did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile.

Suddenly Bilbo looked up. 'Ah, there you are at last, D®nadan!’ he
cried.

'Strider!' said Frodo. 'You seem to have a lot of names.'

'Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo.

'What do you call him that for?’

'They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, 'and that is how I
was introduced to him.'

'And why do you call him D®nadan?’ asked Frodo.

' The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. 'Fie is often called that here. But I thought
you knew enough Elvish at least to know d®n-udan: Man of the West,
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He turned to Strider.

'Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Fady
Arwen was there.'

Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. 'I know,' he said. 'But often I
must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.'

'Well, my dear fellow,' said Bilbo, 'now you've heard the news, can't
you spare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent. Elrond says
this song of mine is to be finished before the end of the evening, and I am
stuck. Fet's go off into a corner and polish it up!'

Strider smiled. 'Come then!' he said. 'Fet me hear it!’

Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep. He
was alone and felt rather forlorn' although all about him the folk of
Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent upon the
music of the voices and the instruments, and they gave no heed to anything
else. Frodo began to listen.

At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words in
elven-tongues, even though he understood them little' held him in a spell,
as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took
shape, and visions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet




imagined opened out before him; and the firelit hall became like a golden
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the world. Then the
enchantment became more and more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless
river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous
for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part of the throbbing air
about him, and it drenched and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep.

There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned into running
water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the voice of Bilbo
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words.

Edrendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;
he built a boat of timber felled
in Nimbrethil to journey in;
her sails he wove of silver fair,
of silver were her lanterns made,
her prow was fashioned like a swan,
and light upon her banners laid.

In panoply of ancient kings,
in chain, d rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runes
to ward all wounds and harm from him;
his bow was made of dragon-horn,
his arrows shorn of ebony,
of silver was his habergeon,
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,
an eagle-plume upon his crest,
upon his breast an emerald.

Beneath the Moon and under star
he wandered far from northern strands,
bewildered on enchanted ways
beyond the days of mortal lands.

From gnashing of the Narrow Ice




where shadow lies on frozen hills,
from nether heats and burning waste
he turned in haste, and roving still
on starless waters far astray
at last he came to Night of Naught,
and passed, and never sight he saw
of shining shore nor light he sought.

The winds of wrath came driving him,
and blindly in the foam he fled
from west to east and errandless,
unheralded he homeward sped.

There flying Elwing came to him,
and flame was in the darkness lit;
more bright than light of diamond
the fire upon her carcanet.

The Silmaril she bound on him
and crowned him with the living light
and dauntless then with burning brow
he turned his prow; and in the night
from Otherworld beyond the Sea
there strong and free a storm arose,
a wind of power in Tarmenel;
by paths that seldom mortal goes
his boat it bore with biting breath
as might of death across the grey
and long-forsaken seas distressed:
from east to west he passed away.

Through Evernight he back was borne
on black and roaring waves that ran
o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores
that drowned before the Days began,
until he heard on strands of pearl
when ends the world the music long,
where ever foaming billows roll




the yellow gold and jewels wan.

He saw the Mountain silent rise
where twilight lies upon the knees
of Valinor, and Eldamar
beheld afar beyond the seas.

A wanderer escaped from night
to haven white he came at last,
to Elvenhome the green and fair
where keen the air, where pale as glass
beneath the Hill of Ilmarin
a-glimmer in a valley sheer
the lamplit towers ofTirion
are mirrored on the Shadowmere.

He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.
They clothed him then in elven-white,
and seven lights before him sent,
as through the Calacirian
to hidden land forlorn he went.

He came unto the timeless halls
where shining fall the countless years,
and endless reigns the Elder King
in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;
and words unheard were spoken then
of folk of Men and Elven-kin,
beyond the world were visions showed
forbid to those that dwell therein.

A ship then new they built for him
of mithril and of elven-glass
with shining prow; no shaven oar
nor sail she bore on silver mast:
the Silmaril as lantern light
and banner bright with living flame




to gleam thereon by Elbereth
herself was set, who thither came
and wings immortal made for him,
and laid on him undying doom,
to sail the shoreless skies and come
behind the Sun and light of Moon.

From Evereven's lofty hills
where softly silver fountains fall
his wings him bore, a wandering light,
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.

From World's End then he turned away
and yearned again to find afar
his home through shadows journeying,
and burning as an island star
on high above the mists he came,
a distant flame before the Sun,
a wonder ere the waking dawn
where grey the Norland waters run.

And over Middle-earth he passed
and heard at last the weeping sore
of women and of elven-maids
in Elder Days, in years of yore,
gut on him mighty doom was laid,
till Moon should fade, an orb,d star
to pass, and tarry never more
on Hither Shores where mortals are;
for ever still a herald on
an errand that should never rest
to bear his shining lamp afar,
the Flammifer of Westernesse.

The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo was
seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were smiling and
applauding.

'Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf.

Bilbo got up and bowed. 'I am flattered, Lindir,’ he said. 'But it




would be too tiring to repeat it all.'

'Not too tiring for you,' the Elves answered laughing. 'You know you
are never tired of reciting your own verses. But really we cannot answer
your uestion at one hearing!'

'What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were mine, and which
were the D®nadan's?'

'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said
the Elf.

'Nonsense, Lindir,' snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a
Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than I imagined. They're as
different as peas and apples.'

'Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,' laughed
Lindir. 'Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other
business.'

'I won't argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'

He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low
voice. 'It went off better than I expected. I don't often get asked for a
second hearing. What did you think of it?'

'I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling.

'You needn't,’ said Bilbo. 'As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except
that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it
important. I don't know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing
rather above my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses
about Edrendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was
right.'

'I don't know,' said Frodo. 'It seemed to me to fit somehow, though I
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began, and it seemed to follow on
from something that I was dreaming about. I didn't understand that it was
really you speaking until near the end.'

'It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it;' said
Bilbo. 'Not that hobbits would ever acuire uite the elvish appetite for
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more.
They will be going on for a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off
for some more uiet talk?'

'Can we?’ said Frodo.

'Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as you like,




as long as you don't make a noise.'

They got up and withdrew uietly into the shadows, and made for the
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on his face. In
spite of his delight in Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of regret as they
passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a
single clear voice rose in song.

A Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna mnriel
o menel aglar elenath!

Na-chaered palan-dnriel
o galadhremmin ennorath,

Fanuilos, le linnathon
nef aear, sn nef aearon!

Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair and
the fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the
Lady Arwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn stood beside her; his
dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a
star shone on his breast. They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed
to Frodo that Arwen turned towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on
him from afar and pierced his heart.

He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song
fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. ' It is a song to
Elbereth,' said Bilbo. 'They will sing that, and other songs of the Blessed
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!'

He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the gar dens
and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There they sat for some
while, looking through the window at the bright stars above the
steep-climbing woods, and talking softly. They spoke no more of the small
news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark shadows and perils that
encompassed them, but of the fair things they had seen in the world
together, of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the gentle fall of the
bright year in the woods.

At last there came a knock on the door. 'Begging your pardon,’ said
Sam, putting in his head, 'but I was just wondering if you would be wanting
anything.'

'And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied Bilbo. 'I guess you mean that
it is time your master went to bed.'




'Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got
up today for the first time.'

'Quite right, Sam,' laughed Bilbo. 'You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!'




Chapter 2 . The Council of Elrond



Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along
the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun
rise above the far mountains, and shine down. Slanting through the thin
silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven
nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside him, saying
nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon their
peaks.

On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came upon
Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. 'Hullo! Good morning!' said Bilbo. 'Feel
ready for the great council?’

'I feel ready for anything,' answered Frodo. 'But most of all I should
like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like to get into
those pine- woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of Rivendell to
the north.

'You may have a chance later,' said Gandalf. 'But we cannot make any
plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.'

Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. 'That is
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cried Gandalf. 'Come along now!
Both you and Bilbo are wanted.'

Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard uickly along the winding path back
to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trotted
Sam.

Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends the
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the
valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river-bed.
Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo his
dangerous flight, and the rumours of the darkness growing in the world
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave.

Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about him.
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting,
clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by




his side, and presented him to the company, saying:

'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.'

He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met before.
There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of whom Erestor
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havens who had
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf
clad in green and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,
the King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a
tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed, proud and
stern of glance.

He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and indeed
though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with fur, they were
stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in which a single white
stone was set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he
wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon his knees. He
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.

'Here,' said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, 'is Boromir, a man from the
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have bidden
him to be present, for here his uestions will be answered.'

Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be told.
Much was said of events in the world outside, especially in the South, and
in the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already
heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour of their
works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were
troubled.

'It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, 'that a shadow of disuiet fell
upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to
be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in a narrow place,
and that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are called in our own
tongue Khazad-dym; and they declared that now at last we had the power and
numbers to return.'

Gluin sighed. 'Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep we
delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast mansions lain




empty since the children of Durin fled. But now we spoke of it again with
longing, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors of
Khazad-dym for many lives of kings, save Thrur only, and he perished. At
last, however, Balin listened to the whispers, and resolved to go; and
though Dbin did not give leave willingly, he took with him Ori and Uin and
many of our folk, and they went away south.

"That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had news and it
seemed good: messages reported that Moria had been entered and a great work
begun there. Then there was silence, and no word has ever come from Moria
since.

"Then about a year ago a messenger came to Dbin, but not from
Moria -from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dbin to his gate. The
Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would
give for it, such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning
hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. "For Sauron knows,"
said he, "that one of these was known to you on a time."

'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And then his
fell voice was lowered, and he would have sweetened it if he could. "As a
small token only of your friendship Sauron asks this," he said: "that you
should find this thief," such was his word, "and get from him, willing or
no, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is but a
trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will. Find it, and
three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be returned to you,
and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief,
whether he still lives and where, and you shall have great reward and
lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seem so well.

Do you refuse?"

'At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who stood by
shuddered, but Dbin said: "I say neither yea nor nay. I must consider this
message and what it means under its fair cloak."

' "Consider well, but not too long," said he.

" "The time of my thought is my own to spend," answered Dbin.

' "For the present," said he, and rode into the darkness.

'Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night. We
needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warn us that his words held
both menace and deceit; for we knew already that the power that has
re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the




messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so
he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year.

'And so I have been sent at last by Dbin to warn Bilbo that he is
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and
draws nearer. We discover that messengers have come also to King Brand in
Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear that he may yield. Already war is
gathering on his eastern borders. If we make no answer, the Enemy may move
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.'

'You have done well to come,' said Elrond. 'You will hear today all
that you need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy. There is
naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without it. But
you do not stand alone. You will learn that your trouble is but part of the
trouble of all the western world. The Ring ! What shall we do with the Ring,
the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we
must deem.

'That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called, I say.
though I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You have
come and are here met, in this very nick of time, by chance as it may seem.

Yet it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit
here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world.

'Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have been hidden
from all but a few until this day. And first, so that all may understand
what is the peril, the Tale of the Ring shall be told from the beginning
even to this present. And I will begin that tale, though others shall end
it.'

Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron and
the Rings of Power, and their forging in the Second Age of the world long
ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full tale to none,
and many eyes were turned t= Elrond in fear and wonder as he told of the
Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness
for knowledge, by which Sauron ensnared them. For in that time he was not
yet evil to behold, and they received his aid and grew mighty in craft,
whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was
aware of him, and hid the Three which he had made; and there was war, and
the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut.




Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but since
that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond himself set it down in
his books of lore, it is not here recalled. For it is a long tale, full of
deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke, the sun rode up
the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased.

Of N®menor he spoke, its glory and its fall, and the return of the
Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the Sea, borne upon the
wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall and his mighty sons, Isildur and
Anbrion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the
South-realm in Gondor above the mouths of Anduin. But Sauron of Mordor
assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and the
hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor.

Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. 'I remember well the
splendour of their banners,' he said. v It recalled to me the glory of the
Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and captains
were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim was
broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was not
so.'

'You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his
astonishment. 'But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I
thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.'

'So it was indeed,' answered Elrond gravely. 'But my memory reaches
back even to the Elder Days. Edrendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin
before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of L®thien
of Doriath. I have seen three ages in the West of the world, and many
defeats, and many fruitless victories.

'I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at the
Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we had the
mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galad and the Sword of Elendil, Aiglos and
Narsil, none could withstand. I beheld the last combat on the slopes of
Orodruin, where Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneath
him; but Sauron himself was overthrown, and Isildur cut the Ring from his
hand with the hilt-shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.'

At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. 'So that is what became of the
Ring!' he cried. 'If ever such a tale was told in the South, it has long
been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that we do not name;
but we believed that it perished from the world in the ruin of his first




realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.'

'Alas! yes,' said Elrond. 'Isildur took it, as should not have been. It
should have been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh at hand where it was
made. But few marked what Isildur did. He alone stood by his father in that
last mortal contest; and by Gil-galad only Cnrdan stood, and I. But Isildur
would not listen to our counsel.

’ "This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother," he
said; and therefore whether we would or no, he took it to treasure it. But
soon he was betrayed by it to his death; and so it is named in the North
Isildur's Bane. Yet death maybe was better than what else might have
befallen him.

'Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a few. Small
wonder it is that you have not heard them, Boromir. From the ruin of the
Gladden Fields, where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back over
the mountains after long wandering. One of these was Ohtar, the esuire of
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to
Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being but a child had remained here in
Rivendell. But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not
yet been forged again.

'Fruitless did I call the victory of the Fast Alliance? Not wholly so,
yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed.

His Ring was lost but not unmade. The Dark Tower was broken, but its
foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring,
and while it remains they will endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men,
and

many of their friends, had perished in the war. Anbrion was slain, and
Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall
there be any such league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the
Firstborn decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. And ever since that
day the race of N®menor has decayed, and the span of their years has
lessened.

'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the
Men of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann®minas beside
Fake

Evendim fell into ruin; and the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at
Fornost on the high North Downs, and that now too is desolate. Men call it
Deadmen's Dike, and they fear to tread there. For the folk of Arnor




dwindled, and their foes devoured them, and their lordship passed, leaving
only green mounds in the grassy hills.

'In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while its
splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might of N®menor, ere it fell.
High towers that people built, and strong places, and havens of many ships;
and the winged crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of many
tongues. Their chief city was Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars, through the
midst of which the River flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the
Rising Moon, eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and
westward at the feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower of
the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the
seed of that tree which Isildur brought over the deep waters, and the seed
of that tree before came from Eressla, and before that out of the Uttermost
West in the Day before days when the world was young.

'But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the line of
Meneldil son of Anbrion failed, and the Tree withered, and the blood of the
N®menoreans became mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon
the

walls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth. And on a
time evil things came forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and
they made it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower
of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of
Guard;

and these two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which lay between was
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked.

'So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of Minas Tirith
still fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage of the River from
Argonath to the Sea. And now that part of the tale that I shall tell is
drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of
all knowledge, and the Three were released from its dominion. But now in
this latter day they are in peril once more, for to our sorrow the One has
been found. Others shall speak of its finding, for in that I played small
part.'

He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before them.

Give me leave, Master Elrond, said he, first to say more of Gondor; for
verily from the land of Gondor I am come. And it would be well for all to
know what passes there. For few, I deem, know of our deeds, and therefore




guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last.

'Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent,
nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of the
East are still restrained, and the terror of Morgul kept at bay; and thus
alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind us, bulwark of
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?

'Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Nameless Enemy has
arisen again. Smoke rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount
Doom.

The power of the Black Land grows and we are hard beset. When the
Enemy

returned our folk were driven from Ithilien, our fair domain east of the
River, though we kept a foothold there and strength of arms. But this very
year, in the days of June, sudden war came upon us out of Mordor, and we
were swept away. We were outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the
Easterlings and the cruel Elaradrim; but it was not by numbers that we were
defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before.

'Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horseman, a dark
shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a madness filled our foes, but fear
fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant
of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still stood
amid the ruins of Osgiliath.

’I was in the company that held the bridge, until it was cast down
behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and
two

others. But still we fight on, holding all the west shores of Anduin; and
those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much
praise but little help. Only from Rohan now will any men ride to us when we
call.

'In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But I do not
seek allies in war. The might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons, it is
said. I come to ask for counsel and the unravelling of hard words. For on
the eve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in a troubled
sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me.

’In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and there was a
growing thunder, but in the West a pale light lingered, and out of it I




heard a voice, remote but clear, crying:

Seek for the Sword that was broken:

In Imladris it dwells;

There shall be counsels taken
Stronger than Morgul-spells.

There shall be shown a token
That Doom is near at hand,

For Isildur's Bane shall waken,

And the Halfling forth shall stand.

Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to our father,
Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of Gondor. This only would
he say, that Imladris was of old the name among the Elves of a far northern
dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, greatest of lore-masters. Therefore
my brother, seeing how desperate was our need, was eager to heed the dream
and seek for Imladris; but since the way was full of doubt and danger, I
took the journey upon myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long
have I wandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of which
many had heard, but few knew where it lay.’

'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you' said
Aragorn, standing up. He cast his sword upon the table that stood before
Elrond, and the blade was in two pieces. 'Here is the Sword that was
Broken!' he said.

'And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?’ asked
Boromir, looking in wonder at the lean face of the Ranger and his
weather-stained cloak.

'He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,' said Elrond; 'and he is descended
through many fathers from Isildur Elendil's son of Minas Ithil. He is the
Chief of the D®nedain in the North, and few are now left of that folk.’

'Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!' cried Frodo in
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be demanded
at once.

'It does not belong to either of us,' said Aragorn; 'but it has been
ordained that you should hold it for a while.'

'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. 'The time has come.
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.'

There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken by
a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to reveal the Ring,




and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and
flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand.

'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond.

Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. 'The Halfling!'
he muttered. 'Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then
should we seek a broken sword?’

’The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith ,’ said Aragorn. 'But doom
and great deeds are indeed at hand. For the Sword that was Broken is the
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when he fell. It has been treasured
by his heirs when all other heirlooms were lost; for it was spoken of old
among us that it should be made again when the Ring, Isildur's Bane, was
found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you
ask?

Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?'

'I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of a
riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. 'Yet we are hard pressed, and the Sword
of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope-if such a thing could indeed
return out of the shadows of the past.' He looked again at Aragorn, and
doubt was in his eyes.

Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out:

All that is gold does not glitter,

Not all those who wander are lost;

The old that is strong does not wither,

Deep roots are not reached by the frost.

From the ashes a fire shall be woken,

A light from the shadows shall spring;

Renewed shall be blade that was broken:

The crownless again shall be king.

'Not very good perhaps, but to the point — if you need more beyond the
word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a hundred and ten days to
hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort.

'I made that up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, 'for the D®nadan, a
long time ago when he first told me about himself. I almost wish that my
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.'

Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. 'For my part I




forgive your doubt,' he said. 'Little do I resemble the figures of Elendil
and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in the halls of Denethor.

I am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I have had a hard life
and a long; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are a small
part in the count of my journeys. I have crossed many mountains and many
rivers, and trodden many plains, even into the far countries of Rhyn and
Harad where the stars are strange.

'But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here the heirs of
Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many
generations. Our days have darkened, and we have dwindled; but ever the
Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I
end. Lonely men are we, Rangers of the wild, hunters— but hunters ever of
the servants of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor
only.

'If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played another
part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do
not stay. You know little of the lands beyond your bounds. Peace and
freedom, do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear
would have destroyed them. But when dark things come from the houseless
hills, or creep from sunless woods, they fly from us. What roads would any
dare to tread, what safety would there be in uiet lands, or in the homes of
simple men at night, if the D®nedain were asleep, or were all gone into the
grave?

'And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and
countrymen give us scornful names. "Strider" I am to one fat man who lives
within a day's march of foes that would freeze his heart or lay his little
town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have it
otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple they will be,
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred,
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown.

'But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur's
Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged. I will come
to Minas Tirith.'

'Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. 'I have seen a bright
ring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur perished ere this age of the world
began, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it
passed down the years, until it is brought hither by so strange a




messenger?'

'That shall be told,' said Elrond.

'But not yet, I beg, Master!’ said Bilbo. 'Already the Sun is climbing
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.’

'I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. 'But I do so now. Come!

Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into verse, you
may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.'

'Very well,' said Bilbo. 'I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the
true story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise' — he looked
sidelong at Gluin — l ask them to forget it and forgive me. I only wished
to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the
name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a little
better now. Anyway, this is what happened.'

To some there Bilbo's tale was wholly new, and they listened with
amazement while the old hobbit, actually not at all displeased, recounted
his adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle.

He would have given also an account of his party and disappearance from the
Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand.

'Well told, my friend,' he said, 'but that is enough at this time. For
the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let
him now speak!'

Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his dealings with
the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of his
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was uestioned and considered,
and everything that he could recall concerning the Black Riders was
examined. At last he sat down again.

'Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. 'You would have made a good story of it,
if they hadn't kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes, but we
shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'

'Yes, it made uite a long tale,' answered Frodo. 'But the story still
does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especially
about Gandalf.'

Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. 'You speak for me
also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he said: 'The Wise may have good
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long
debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not




hear the proofs? And I would ask this also. What of Saruman? He is learned
in the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he
knows the things that we have heard?'

'The uestions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond.

I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it
is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon him last, for it is
the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.'

'Some, Galdor,' said Gandalf, 'would think the tidings of Gluin, and
the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of
great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazgyl
keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.' At this Gluin stirred, but did not
speak. 'The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?

'There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the
Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But the gap in the knowledge of
the Wise has been filled at last. Yet too slowly. For the Enemy has been
close behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this
year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth.

'Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the
doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, and secretly explored his ways, and
found thus that our fears were true: he was none other than Sauron, our
Enemy of old, at length taking shape and power again. Some, too, will
remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and
for

long we watched him only. Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded,
and the Council put forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood
and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance,
if chance it was.

'But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had watched us,
and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through
Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until all was ready. Then he
gave way before us, but only feigned to flee, and soon after came to the
Dark Tower and openly declared himself. Then for the last time the Council
met; for now we learned that he was seeking ever more eagerly for the One.
We feared then that he had some news of it that we knew nothing of. But
Saruman said nay, and repeated what he had said to us before: that the One
would never again be found in Middle-earth.

"At the worst," said he, "our Enemy knows that we have it not and




that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet be found, he thinks. Fear
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into
Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled
down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End.'"

Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long
lain hidden. He sighed.

'There I was at fault,' he said. 'I was lulled by the words of Saruman
the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would
now be less.’

'We were all at fault,’ said Elrond, 'and but for your vigilance the
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!’

'From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,'
said Gandalf, 'and I desired to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how
long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for him, guessing that he would
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but
he escaped and was not found. And then alas ! I let the matter rest, watching
and waiting only, as we have too often done.

'Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awakened again to
sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit's ring? What, if my fear was true,
should be done with it? Those things I must decide. But I spoke yet of my
dread to none, knowing the peril of an untimely whisper, if it went astray.

In all the long wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest
foe.

'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that spies of many
sorts, even beasts and birds, were gathered round the Shire, and my fear
grew. I called for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch was doubled;
and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.'

'And I,' said Aragorn, 'counselled that we should hunt for Gollum. too
late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's heir should
labour to repair Isildur's fault, I went with Gandalf on the long and
hopeless search.'

Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland,
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. 'There we
had

rumour of him, and we guess that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but
we never found him, and at last I despaired. And then in my despair I




thought again of a test that might make the finding of Gollum unneeded. The
ring itself might tell if it were the One. The memory of words at the
Council came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard
them now clearly in my heart.

' "The Nine, the Seven, and the Three," he said, "had each their proper
gem. Not so the One. It was round and unadorned, as it were one of the
lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could
still see and read."

'What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The
maker.

And Saruman? But great though his lore may be, it must have a source. What
hand save Sauron’s ever held this thing, ere it was lost? The hand of
Isildur alone.

'With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly to Gondor.

In former days the members of my order had been well received there, but
Saruman most of all. Often he had been for long the guest of the Lords of
the City. Less welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and
grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.

’ "If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient days,
and the beginnings of the City, read on! " he said. "For to me what was is
less dark than what is to come, and that is my care. But unless you have
more skill even than Saruman, who has studied here long, you will find
naught that is not well known to me, who am master of the lore of this
City."

'So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many records that
few now can read, even of the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues
have become dark to later men. And Boromir, there lies in Minas Tirith
still, unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself since the kings
failed, a scroll that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not march away
straight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.’

'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in. 'All know in Gondor that
he went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil,
instructing him, before he committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom.
In that time he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in memory
of his brother.'

'But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf; 'and that is
not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns the Ring,




and thus wrote Isildur therein:

The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but
records of it shall be left in Gondor, where also dwell the heirs of
Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great matters shall grow
dim.

'And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it.

It was hot when I first took it, hot as a glede, and my hand was
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain of it.

Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth
neither its beauty nor its shape. Already the writing upon it, which at
first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now only barely to be read.

It is fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they have no letters in
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to
be a tongue of the Black Land, since it is foul and uncouth. What evil it
saith I do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade beyond
recall. The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black
and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the
gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed, gut for my part I will
risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It is
precious to me, though I buy it with great pain.

’When I read these words, my uest was ended. For the traced writing
was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and the servants of
the Tower. And what was said therein was already known. For in the day that
Sauron first put on the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the Three, was aware of
him, and from afar he heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes
were revealed.

'At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went northwards,
messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went first to meet him
and hear his tale. Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I dared not
guess.’

'There is little need to tell of them,’ said Aragorn. 'If a man must
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul
Vale, then perils he will have. I, too, despaired at last, and I began my
homeward journey. And then, by fortune, I came suddenly on what I sought:
the marks of soft feet beside a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and
swift, and it led not to Mordor but away. Along the skirts of the Dead




Marshes I followed it, and then I had him. Lurking by a stagnant mere,
peering in the water as the dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was
covered with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and
I was not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks
of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back,
watching him day and night, making him walk before me with a halter on his
neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever
towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave him to the Elves, for
we had agreed that this should be done; and I was glad to be rid of his
company, for he stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but
Gandalf came and endured long speech with him.’

'Yes, long and weary,' said Gandalf, 'but not without profit. For one
thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now
told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had
already guessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he had
possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring had
lengthened his years far beyond their span; but that power only the Great
Rings wield.

'And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test that
I spoke of. Upon this very ring which you have here seen held aloft, round
and unadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may still be read, if one
has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I
have done, and this I have read:

Ash nazg durbatulyk, ush nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatulyk agh
burzum-ishi krimpatul. '

The change in the wizard's voice was astounding. Suddenly it became
menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to pass over the high
sun, and the porch for a moment grew dark. All trembled, and the Elves
stopped their ears.

'Never before has any voice dared to utter the words of that tongue in
Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the shadow assed and the
comany breathed once more.

'And let us hoe that none will ever seak it here again,' answered
Gandalf. 'Nonetheless I do not ask your ardon, Master Elrond. For if that
tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West, then let all ut
doubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the




treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice; and in it lies a great
art of his strength of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the
Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed:

One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring
them all and in the Darkness bind them.

'Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum. He was
loth to seak and his tale was unclear, but it is beyond all doubt that he
went to Mordor, and there all that he knew was forced from him. Thus the
Enemy knows now that the One is found, that it was long in the Shire; and
since his servants have ursued it almost to our door, he soon will know,
already he may know, even as I seak, that we have it here.'

All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir soke. 'He is a
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became
of him? To what doom did you ut him?’

'He is in rison, but no worse,' said Aragorn. 'He had suffered much.

There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of Sauron lies black
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely ket by the watchful
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be
believed in one so lean and withered. He could work much mischief still, if
he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some
evil errand.'

'Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair elvish face there was
great distress. 'The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They
are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may seem to this
comany. Smjagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaed.’

'Escaed?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it
bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?'

'Not through lack of watchfulness,' said Legolas; 'but erhas through
over -kindliness. And we fear that the risoner had aid from others, and that
more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day
and night, at Gandalf s bidding, much though we wearied of the task. But
Gandalf bade us hoe still for his cure, and we had not the heart to kee
him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall back into his old
black thoughts.'

'You were less tender to me,' said Gluin with a flash of his eyes as
old memories were stirred of his imrisonment in the dee laces of the
Elven-king's halls.




'Now come!' said Gandalf. 'Pray do not interrut, my good Gluin. That
was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances
that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought u here, we may as
well abandon this Council.'

Gluin rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. 'In the days of fair
weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree standing
alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount u
to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at
the tree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind
to climb after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his
feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night.

'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Ores
came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time; they were many
and fierce, but they came from over the mountains, and were unused to the
woods. When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone, and his
guards were slain or taken. It then seemed lain to us that the attack had
been made for his rescue, and that he knew of it beforehand. How that was
contrived we cannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the sies of the Enemy
are many. The dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon's
fall have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil lace,
save where our realm is maintained.

'We have failed to recature Gollum. We came on his trail among those
of many Ores, and it lunged dee into the Forest, going south. But ere long
it escaed our skill, and we dared not continue the hunt; for we were
drawing nigh to Dol Guldur, and that is still a very evil lace; we do not
go that way.’

'Well, well, he is gone,' said Gandalf. 'We have no time to seek for
him again. He must do what he will. But he may lay a art yet that neither
he nor Sauron have foreseen.

'And now I will answer Galdor's other uestions. What of Saruman? What
are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for only
Elrond has heard it yet, and that in brief, but it will bear on all that we
must resolve. It is the last chater in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it
has yet gone.

'At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was on
my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I had a
foreboding of some danger, still hidden from me but drawing near. There




messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard
of the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing save a few
fugitives from the South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of
which they would not seak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along
the Greenway; and not far from Bree I came uon a traveller sitting on a
bank beside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was Radagast the
Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the borders of Mirkwood.

He

is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year.

' "Gandalf ! " he cried. "I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in
these arts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with
the uncouth name of Shire."

' "Your information was correct," I said. "But do not ut it that way,
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the borders of the Shire
now. And what do you want with me? It must be ressing. You were never a
traveller, unless driven by great need."

' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he looked
about him, as if the hedges might have ears. "Nazgyl," he whisered. "The
Nine are abroad again. They have crossed the River secretly and are moving
westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black."

'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.

" "The enemy must have some great need or urose," said Radagast; "but
what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate arts, I cannot
guess."

v "What do you mean? " said I.

v "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news of a
land called Shire."

' "The Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise might fear
to withstand the Nine, when they are gathered together under their fell
chieftain. A great king and sorcerer he was of old, and now he wields a
deadly fear. "Who told you, and who sent you? " I asked.

' "Saruman the White," answered Radagast. "And he told me to say that
if you feel the need, he will hel; but you must seek his aid at once, or it
will be too late."

'And that message brought me hoe. For Saruman the White is the
greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy Wizard, a master of
shaes and changes of hue; and he has much lore of herbs and beasts, and




birds are esecially his friends. But Saruman has long studied the arts of
the Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him. It was
by the devices of Saruman that we drove him from Dol Guldur. It might be
that he had found some weaons that would drive back the Nine.

' "I will go to Saruman," I said.

' "Then you must go now," said Radagast; "for I have wasted time in
looking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to find you
before Midsummer, and that is now here. Even if you set out from this sot,
you will hardly reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek.

I myself shall turn back at once." And with that he mounted and would have
ridden straight off.

' "Stay a moment! " I said. "We shall need your hel, and the hel of
all things that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and birds
that are your friends. Tell them to bring news of anything that bears on
this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc."

"I will do that," he said, and rode off as if the Nine were after

him.

'I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very far already
that day, and I was as weary as my horse; and I needed to consider matters.

I stayed the night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the
Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake!

'However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my friend the
innkeeer to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to
the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard, in the end of the
Misty Mountains, not far from the Ga of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you
that that is a great oen vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the
northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But
Isengard is a circle of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall,
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was
not made by Saruman, but by the Men of N®menor long ago; and it is very tall
and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot be
reached save by assing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is
only one gate.

'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in the wall of
rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keeers of the gate were on the
watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and
the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knew




no reason for it.

'But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of Saruman
and there he met me and led me u to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his
finger.

"So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in his eyes
there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart.

v "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have come for your aid, Saruman the
White." And that title seemed to anger him.

' "Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey l " he scoffed. "For aid? It has
seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one so cunning
and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning himself in every
business, whether it belongs to him or not."

'I looked at him and wondered. "But if I am not deceived," said I,

"things are now moving which will reuire the union of all our strength."

' "That may be so," he said, "but the thought is late in coming to you.

How long. I wonder, have you concealed from me, the head of the Council, a
matter of greatest imort? What brings you now from your lurking-lace in
the Shire? "

' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed the
River. So Radagast said to me."

v "Radagast the Brown! " laughed Saruman, and he no longer concealed
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simle! Radagast the Fool!
Yet he had just the wit to lay the art that I set him. For you have come,
and that was all the urose of my message. And here you will stay, Gandalf
the Grey, and rest from journeys. For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman
Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! "

'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not
so, but were woven of all colours, and if he moved they shimmered and
changed hue so that the eye was bewildered.

' "I liked white better," I said.

' "White! " he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White cloth may be
dyed. The white age can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken."

' "In which case it is no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a
thing to find out what it is has left the ath of wisdom."

' "You need not seak to me as to one of the fools that you take for
friends," said he. "I have not brought you hither to be instructed by you,
but to give you a choice."




'He drew himself u then and began to declaim, as if he were making a
seech long rehearsed. "The Elder Days are gone. The Middle Days are
assing. The Younger Days are beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but
our time is at hand: the world of Men, which we must rule. But we must have
ower, ower to order all things as we will, for that good which only the
Wise can see.

' "And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and heler! " he said, coming
near and seaking now in a softer voice. "I said we, for we it may be, if
you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old allies and
olicies will not avail us at all. There is no hoe left in Elves or dying
N®menor. This then is one choice before you. before us. We may join with
that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hoe that way. Its victory
is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the
Power grows, its roved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you
and I, may with atience come at last to direct its courses, to control it.

We can bide our time, we can kee our thoughts in our hearts, deloring
maybe evils done by the way, but aroving the high and ultimate urose:
Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain
to accomlish, hindered rather than heled by our weak or idle friends.
There need not be, there would not be, any real change in our designs, only
in our means."

' "Saruman," I said, "I have heard seeches of this kind before, but
only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I
cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears."

'He looked at me sidelong, and aused a while considering. "Well, I see
that this wise course does not commend itself to you," he said. "Not yet?

Not if some better way can be contrived? "

'He came and laid his long hand on my arm. "And why not, Gandalf? " he
whisered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could command that, then the
Power would ass to us. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have
many eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this recious
thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what
is your business there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal
shone suddenly in his eyes.

' "Saruman," I said, standing away from him, "only one hand at a time
can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we! But
I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now that




I learn your mind. You were head of the Council, but you have unmasked
yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to submit to Sauron, or
to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? "

’He was cold now and erilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not exect you to
show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding me
willingly, and so saving yourself much trouble and ain. The third choice is
to stay here, until the end."

' "Until what end? "

' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find means
to ersuade you. Or until it is found in your desite, and the Ruler has
time to turn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a fitting reward for the
hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey."

' "That may not rove to be one of the lighter matters," said I. He
laughed at me, for my words were emty, and he knew it.

'They took me and they set me alone on the innacle of Orthanc, in the
lace where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars. There is no descent
save by a narrow stair of many thousand stes, and the valley below seems
far away. I looked on it and saw that, whereas it had once been green and
fair, it was now filled with its and forges. Wolves and ores were housed in
Isengard, for Saruman was mustering a great force on his own account, in
rivalry of Sauron and not in his service yet. Over all his works a dark
smoke hung and wraed itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on
an island in the clouds; and I had no chance of escae, and my days were
bitter. I was ierced with cold, and I had but little room in which to ace
to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North.

'That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, aart from the words
of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I came to Isengard I had heard
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some hoe. I hoed that Frodo had
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell
before the deadly ursuit began. And both my fear and my hoe roved
ill-founded. For my hoe was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the ower of Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in
the circle of Isengard, traed and alone, it was not easy to think that the
hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far
away.’




'I saw you!' cried Frodo. 'You were walking backwards and forwards. The
moon shone in your hair.'

Gandalf aused astonished and looked at him. 'It was only a dream' said
Frodo, 'but it suddenly came back to me. I had uite forgotten it. It came
some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.'

'Then it was late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in
an evil light. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in
such need, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught
like a fly in a sider's treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle siders
may leave a weak thread.

'At first I feared, as Saruman no doubt intended, that Radagast had
also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in his voice or in
his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I
should have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed his
mind and deceived his messenger. It would have been useless in any case to
try and win over the honest Radagast to treachery. He sought me in good
faith, and so ersuaded me.

'That was the undoing of Saruman's lot. For Radagast knew no reason
why he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where
he

had many friends of old. And the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide,
and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Ores;
and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands; and they heard
news of the escae of Gollum. And they sent a messenger to bring these
tidings to me.

'So it was that when summer waned, there came a night of moon, and
Gwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great Eagles, came unlooked-for to
Orthanc; and he found me standing on the innacle. Then I soke to him and
he bore me away, before Saruman was aware. I was far from Isengard, ere the
wolves and ores issued from the gate to ursue me.

' "How far can you bear me? " I said to Gwaihir.

' "Many leagues," said he, "but not to the ends of the earth. I was
sent to bear tidings not burdens."

' "Then I must have a steed on land," I said, "and a steed surassingly
swift, for I have never had such need of haste before."

' "Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan sits in his
halls," he said; "for that is not very far off." And I was glad, for in the




Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and there are no
horses like those that are bred in that great vale between the Misty
Mountains and the White.

' "Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? " I said to
Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith.

' "They ay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly to
Mordor, or so it is said; but they are not yet under the yoke. But if
Saruman has become evil, as you say, then their doom cannot be long
delayed."

'He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now I have
lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found
evil already at work: the lies of Saruman; and the king of the land would
not listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose
one much to my liking, but little to his. I took the best horse in his land,
and I have never seen the like of him.’

’Then he must be a noble beast indeed,’ said Aragorn; 'and it grieves
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to learn that Sauron levies
such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.’

'Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. 'It is a lie that comes
from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan; true and valiant, our allies,
dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.’

'The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,’ answered Aragorn.
’Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find
there, if ever you return?’

'Not this at least.’ said Boromir, ’that they will buy their lives with
horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without reason,
for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from
the Shadow, and their race, as that of their masters, is descended from the
free days of old.’

’True indeed!’ said Gandalf. 'And there is one among them that might
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of the Nine cannot
vie with him; tireless, swift as the flowing wind. Shadowfax they called
him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade,
and he asses unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had any man
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so seedily he bore me that
I reached the Shire when Frodo was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton.




'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of
the Riders, and though I gained on them day by day, they were ever before
me. They had divided their forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern
borders, not far from the Greenway. and some invaded the Shire from the
south. I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had words with old
Gamgee. Many words and few to the oint. He had much to say about the
shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End.

' "I can't abide changes," said he, "not at my time of life, and least
of all changes for the worst." "Changes for the worst," he reeated many
times.

' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hoe you do not live to
see it." But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton
less than a week before, and that a black horseman had come to the Hill the
same evening. Then I rode on in fear. I came to Buckland and found it in
uroar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came
to the house at Crickhollow, and it was broken oen and emty; but on the
threshold there lay a cloak that had been Frodo's. Then for a while hoe
left me, and I did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted;
but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went
many ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me that one or two had
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought of words that might
be said to the innkeeer.

' "Butterbur they call him," thought I. "If this delay was his fault, I
will melt all the butter in him. I will roast the old fool over a slow
fire." He exected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down flat and
began to melt on the sot.'

'What did you do to him?' cried Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very
kind to us and did all that he could.'

Gandalf laughed. 'Don't be afraid!' he said. 'I did not bite, and I
barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of him,
when he stoed uaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How it haened I
could not then guess, but I learned that you had been in Bree the night
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider.

' "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy.

"Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir," said Butterbur, mistaking me. "He
got at them, in site of all that I could do, and they took u with him.

They behaved very ueer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say."




"Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman! " said I. "It's the
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold iece at the least.
May your beer be laid under an enchantment of surassing excellence for
seven years! " said I. "Now I can take a night's rest, the first since I
have forgotten when."

'Sol stayed there that night, wondering much what had become of the
Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed. But
in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw
down the gates and assed through Bree like a howling wind; and the
Bree-folk are still shivering and execting the end of the world. I got u
before dawn and went after them.

'I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what haened.

Their Catain remained in secret away south of Bree, while two rode ahead
through the village, and four more invaded the Shire. But when these were
foiled in Bree and at Crickhollow, they returned to their Catain with
tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for a while, excet by their sies.

The Catain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he himself
with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath.

'I galloed to Weatherto like a gale, and I reached it before sundown
on my second day from Bree-and they were there before me. They drew
away

from me, for they felt the coming of my anger and they dared not face it
while the Sun was in the sky. But they closed round at night, and I was
besieged on the hill -to, in the old ring of Amon Syl. I was hard ut to it
indeed: such light and flame cannot have been seen on Weatherto since the
war-beacons of old.

'At sunrise I escaed and fled towards the north. I could not hoe to
do more. It was imossible to find you, Frodo, in the wilderness, and it
would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. Sol had to
trust to Aragorn. But I hoed to draw some of them off, and yet reach
Rivendell ahead of you and send out hel. Four Riders did indeed follow me,
but they turned back after a while and made for the Ford, it seems. That
heled a little, for there were only five, not nine, when your cam was
attacked.

’I reached here at last by a long hard road, u the Floarwell and
through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly fourteen
days from Weatherto, for I could not ride among the rocks of the




troll-fells, and Shadowfax dearted. I sent him back to his master; but a
great friendshi has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my
call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell only three days before the
Ring, and news of its eril had already been brought here-which roved well
indeed.

'And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the others
forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not haened before, that
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he romised. An account to the
Ring-bearer of so strange an event was reuired, I think.

'Well, the Tale is now told, from first to last. Here we all are, and
here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any nearer to our urose. What
shall we do with it?'

There was silence. At last Elrond soke again.

'This is grievous news concerning Saruman,' he said; 'for we trusted
him and he is dee in all our counsels. It is erilous to study too deely
the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls and betrayals,
alas, have haened before. Of the tales that we have heard this day the
tale of Frodo was most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo
here; and it seems to me that he is erhas not so alone and singular as I
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the
westward
roads.

'The Barrow- wights we know by many names; and of the Old Forest
many

tales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern
march. Time was when a suirrel could go from tree to tree from what is now
the Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and
many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed
this is still the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even
then was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar we
called him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he has since been
given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald by Northern Men, and other
names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned
him

to our Council.'

'He would not have come,' said Gandalf.

'Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his hel?’ asked




Erestor. 'It seems that he has a ower even over the Ring.'

'No, I should not ut it so,’ said Gandalf. 'Say rather that the Ring
has no ower over him. He is his own master. But he cannot alter the Ring
itself, nor break its ower over others. And now he is withdrawn into a
little land, within bounds that he has set, though none can see them,
waiting erhas for a change of days, and he will not ste beyond them.'

'But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,' said Erestor.
'Would he not take the Ring and kee it there, for ever harmless?’

'No,’ said Gandalf, 'not willingly. He might do so, if all the free
folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need. And if
he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely throw it
away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe
guardian; and that alone is answer enough.’

'But in any case,’ said Glorfindel, 'to send the Ring to him would only
ostone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take it back to
him, unguessed, unmarked by any sy. And even if we could, soon or late the
Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding lace and would bend all his
ower towards it. Could that ower be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not.

I think that in the end, if all else is conuered, Bombadil will fall, Last
as he was First; and then Night will come.’

'I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; 'but Glorfindel,

I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless such ower
is in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can torture and destroy
the very hills. What ower still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, or
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we
here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the coming of Sauron at the last,
when all else is overthrown?’

'I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; 'neither have they.’

'Then if the Ring cannot be ket from him for ever by strength’ said
Glorfindel, 'two things only remain for us to attemt: to send it over the
Sea, or to destroy it.’

'But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft
that we here ossess,’ said Elrond. 'And they who dwell beyond the Sea would
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who
still dwell here to deal with it.’

’Then, said Glorfindel, ’let us cast it into the dees, and so make the
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the Council his




feet were already on a crooked ath. He knew that the Ring was not lost for
ever, but wished us to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself.

Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.'

'Not safe for ever,' said Gandalf. 'There are many things in the dee
waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our art here to take
thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or for a assing age
of the world. We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not
hoe to make one.’

'And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,' said Galdor. 'If
the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then flight to the S,a is
now fraught with gravest eril. My heart tells me that Sauron will exect us
to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The
Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is but a resite, ere they find new
steeds and swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between him
and a march in ower along the coasts into the North; and if he comes,
assailing the White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no
escae from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.'

'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, you
say. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength is still very
strong.'

'And yet its vigilance can no longer kee back the Nine,' said Galdor.

'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.'

'Then,' said Erestor, 'there are but two courses, as Glorfindel already
has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But both are
beyond our ower. Who will read this riddle for us?’

'None here can do so,' said Elrond gravely. 'At least none can foretell
what will come to ass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now
clear which is the road that we must take. The westward road seems easiest.
Therefore it must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves have
fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen.
There lies our hoe, if hoe it be. To walk into eril-to Mordor. We must
send the Ring to the Fire.’

Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking out uon a
sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in
his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He was fingering his
great horn and frowning. At length he soke.

’I do not understand all this,' he said. 'Saruman is a traitor, but did




he not have a glimse of wisdom? Why do you seak ever of hiding and
destroying? Why should we not think that the Great Ring has come into our
hands to serve us in the very hour of need? Wielding it the Free Lords of
the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem.

The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit; but they
may be beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weaon. Let the
Ring be your weaon, if it has such ower as you say. Take it and go forth
to victory!'

’Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ’We cannot use the Ruling Ring. That we now
know too well. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone, and is
altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone to wield at
will, save only those who have already a great ower of their own. But for
them it holds an even deadlier eril. The very desire of it corruts the
heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow
the Lord of Mordor, using his own arts, he would then set himself on
Sauron’s throne, and yet another Dark Lord would aear. And that is another
reason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it
will be a danger even to the Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning.
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take
the Ring to wield it.'

'Nor I,' said Gandalf.

Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head. 'So be it,’
he said. 'Then in Gondor we must trust to such weaons as we have. And at
the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayha the
Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide — if the hand that wields it
has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’

'Who can tell?’ said Aragorn. 'But we will ut it to the test one day.’

'May the day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though I do
not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others fought
also with all the means that they have.'

'Then be comforted,’ said Elrond. 'For there are other owers and
realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin the Great
flows ast many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.'

'Still it might be well for all,' said Gluin the Dwarf, 'if all these
strengths were joined, and the owers of each were used in league. Other
rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our need. The
Seven are lost to us — if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which was




the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrur erished in Moria. Indeed
I may now reveal that it was artly in hoe to find that ring that Balin
went away.’

'Balin will find no ring in Moria,' said Gandalf. 'Thrur gave it to
Thrbin his son, but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken with torment from
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.'

'Ah, alas!' cried Gluin. 'When will the day come of our revenge? But
still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty
Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords kee them? Yet they too were made by
the Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not
say?'

The Elves returned no answer. 'Did you not hear me, Gluin?’ said
Elrond. 'The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But
of them it is not ermitted to seak. So much only in this' hour of doubt I
may now say. They are not idle. But they were not made as weaons of war or
conuest: that is not their ower. Those who made them did not desire
strength or domination or hoarded wealth, but understanding, making, and
healing, to reserve all things unstained. These things the Elves of
Middle-earth have in some measure gained, though with sorrow. But all that
has been wrought by those who wield the Three will turn to their undoing,
and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his urose.'

'But what then would haen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed as you
counsel?’ asked Gluin.

'We know not for certain,' answered Elrond sadly. 'Some hoe that the
Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then become free, and
their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that he has wrought. But
maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will
fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.'

'Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel
'if by it the ower of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be
taken away for ever.'

'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor,

'and yet we come no nearer. What strength have we for the finding of the
Fire in which it was made? That is the ath of desair. Of folly I would
say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.'

'Desair, or folly?' said Gandalf. 'It is not desair, for desair is




only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not. It is wisdom to
recognize necessity, when all other courses have been weighed, though as
folly it may aear to those who cling to false hoe. Well, let folly be our
cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs
all things to a nicety in the scales of his malice. But the only measure
that he knows is desire, desire for ower; and so he judges all hearts. Into
his heart the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that having
the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall ut him out of
reckoning.'

'At least for a while,' said Elrond. 'The road must be trod, but it
will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far uon
it. This uest may be attemted by the weak with as much hoe as the strong.
Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.'

'Very well, very well, Master Elrond!' said Bilbo suddenly. 'Say no
more! It is lain enough what you are ointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit
started this affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very
comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want to know, I am
just writing an ending for it. I had thought of utting: and he lived
haily ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good ending, and
none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall have to alter that:
it does not look like coming true; and anyway there will evidently have to
be several more chaters, if I live to write them. It is a frightful
nuisance. When ought I to start?

' Boromir looked in surrise at Bilbo, but the laughter died on his
lis when he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave
resect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.

'Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. 'If you had really started
this affair, you might be exected to finish it. But you know well enough
now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small art
is layed in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer.

But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has
assed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your art is
ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending
unaltered! There is still hoe for it. But get ready to write a seuel, when
they come back.'




Bilbo laughed. 'I have never known you give me leasant advice before.'
he said. 'As all your unleasant advice has been good, I wonder if this
advice is not bad. Still, I don't suose I have the strength or luck left
to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do
you mean by they?

'The messengers who are sent with the Ring.’

'Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what this Council
has to decide, and all that it has to decide. Elves may thrive on seech
alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness; but I am only an old hobbit, and
I miss my meal at noon. Can't you think of some names now? Or ut it off
till after dinner?'

No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one soke. Frodo glanced
at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the Council sat with
downcast eyes, as if in dee thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he
was awaiting the ronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen and
vainly hoed might after all never be soken. An overwhelming longing to
rest and remain at eace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all his heart.

At last with an effort he soke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if
some other will was using his small voice.

'I will take the Ring,' he said, 'though I do not know the way.'

Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heart
ierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. 'If I understand aright all
that I have heard,' he said, 'I think that this task is aointed for you,

Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no one will. This is the hour of
the Shire-folk, when they arise from their uiet fields to shake the towers
and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise could have foreseen it? Or,
if they are wise, why should they exect to know it, until the hour has
struck?

'But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it on another.

I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I will say that your
choice is right; and though all the mighty elf-friends of old, Hador, and
H®rin, and T®rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat
should

be among them.'

'But you won't send him off alone surely, Master?' cried Sam, unable to
contain himself any longer, and juming u from the corner where he had been
uietly sitting on the floor.




'No indeed!' said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. 'You at
least shall go with him. It is hardly ossible to searate you from him,
even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.'

Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. 'A nice ickle we have landed
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.




Chater 3 . The Ring Goes South



Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.
Merry and Piin were indignant when they heard that Sam had cret into the
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's comanion.

'It's most unfair,' said Piin. 'Instead of throwing him out, and
claing him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!'

'Rewards!' said Frodo. 'I can't imagine a more severe unishment. You
are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this hoeless
journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could
rest here, a long while, erhas for good.'

'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying
Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a unishment for any of us
to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and
been through some stiff times. We want to go on.'

'That's what I meant,' said Piin. 'We hobbits ought to stick
together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me u. There must be
someone with intelligence in the arty.'

'Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!' said Gandalf,
looking in through the window, which was near the ground. 'But you are all
worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.'

'Nothing decided!’ cried Piin. ’Then what were you all doing? You
were shut u for hours.'

"Talking,' said Bilbo. 'There was a deal of talk, and everyone had an
eye-oener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas's bit of news about Gollum
caught even him on the ho, though he assed it off.'

'You were wrong,' said Gandalf. 'You were inattentive. I had already
heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-oeners, as
you ut it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was not
surrised.'

'Well, anyway,' said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing oor
Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the
reorts come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?'

'Yes,' said the wizard. 'Some of the scouts have been sent out already.




More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they will get in touch
with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And
Aragorn

has gone with Elrond's sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for
many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer u, Frodo! You will
robably make uite along stay here.'

'Ah!' said Sam gloomily. 'We'll just wait long enough for winter to
come.'

'That can't be heled,' said Bilbo. 'It's your fault artly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it, I
can't hel thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill sring; and you can't
go till the reorts come back.

When winter first begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when ools are black and trees are bare,

'tis evil in the Wild to fare.

But that I am afraid will be just your luck.'

'I am afraid it will,' said Gandalf. 'We can't start until we have
found out about the Riders.'

T thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry.

'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. 'The ower of
their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hoe that they
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to hel you; but I will
whiser this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in
the arty. He was right. I think I shall come with you.'

So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the
window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. 'I
only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.'

'How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo when
Gandalf had gone.

'Oh, I don't know. I can't count days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But
uite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about heling




me with my book, and making a start on the next? Have you thought of an
ending?'

'Yes, several, and all are dark and unleasant,' said Frodo.

'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. 'Books ought to have good endings. How
would this do: and they all settled down and lived together haily ever
after?'

'It will do well, if it ever comes to that,' said Frodo.

'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.'

For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the ast journey
and of the erils that lay ahead; but such was the virtue of the land of
Rivendell that soon all fear and anxiety was lifted from their minds. The
future, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have any ower over
the resent. Health and hoe grew strong in them, and they were content with
each good day as it came, taking leasure in every meal, and in every word
and song.

So the days slied away, as each morning dawned bright and fair, and
each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly the
golden light faded to ale silver, and the lingering leaves fell from the
naked trees. A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the
east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the night sky, and ut to flight all
the lesser stars. But low in the South one star shone red. Every night, as
the Moon waned again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it
from his window, dee in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared
above the trees on the brink of the valley.

The hobbits had been nearly two months in the House of Elrond, and
November had gone by with the last shreds of autumn, and December was
assing, when the scouts began to return. Some had gone north beyond the
srings of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west, and
with the hel of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the
Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by
a ruined town. Many had gone east and south; and some of these had crossed
the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the ass at the
source of the Gladden River, and had come down into Wilderland and over the
Gladden Fields and so at length had reached the old home of Radagast at
Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and they had returned over the high ass
that was called the Dimrill Stair. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and Elrohir,
were the last to return; they had made a great journey, assing down the




Silverlode into a strange country, but of their errand they would not seak
to any save to Elrond.

In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings of the
Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the Misty
Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing had been seen or heard of
Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far
u the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned
in the flooded Ford. On the rocks of the raids below it searchers
discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and
tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their resence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.

’Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,' said Gandalf. 'It
is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hoe now that the
Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best they
could to their Master in Mordor, emty and shaeless.

Tf that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journey
all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can ick u our trail.

And if we are careful that will be hard to find. But we must delay no
longer.'

Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo. 'The
time has come,' he said. 'If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon. But
those who go with it must not count on their errand being aided by war or
force. They must ass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you
still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?'

'I do,' said Frodo. 'I will go with Sam.'

'Then I cannot hel you much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. 'I
can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved I
do not know. The Shadow has cret now to the feet of the Mountains, and
draws nigh even to the borders of Greyflood; and under the Shadow all is
dark to me. You will meet many foes, some oen, and some disguised; and
you

may find friends uon your way when you least look for it. I will send out
messages, such as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world;
but so erilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry, or
come no uicker than you yourself.

'And I will choose you comanions to go with you, as far as they will




or fortune allows. The number must be few, since your hoe is in seed and
secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armour of the Elder Days, it would avail
little, save to arouse the ower of Mordor.

'The Comany of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers shall be
set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your faithful
servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and maybe the
end of his labours.

'For the rest, they shall reresent the other Free Peoles of the
World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and Gimli
son of Gluin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least to the asses
of the Mountains, and maybe beyond. For men you shall have Aragorn son of
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.'

'Strider!' said Frodo.

’Yes,' he said with a smile. 'I ask leave once again to be your
comanion, Frodo.'

'I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, 'only I thought you were
going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.'

'I am,' said Aragorn. 'And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforged
ere I set out to war. But your road and our road lie together for many
hundreds of miles. Therefore Boromir will also be in the Comany. He is a
valiant man.’

’There remain two more to be found,' said Elrond. "These I will
consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.'

'But that will leave no lace for us!' cried Piin in dismay. 'We
don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.'

'That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies
ahead,' said Elrond.

'Neither does Frodo,' said Gandalf, unexectedly suorting Piin.

'Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits understood
the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would still wish to go, or
wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhay. I think, Elrond, that in
this matter it would be well to trust rather to their friendshi than to
great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord, such as Glorfindel, he
could not storm the Dark Tower, nor oen the road to the Fire by the ower
that is in him.'

'You seak gravely,' said Elrond, 'but I am in doubt. The Shire, I
forebode, is not free now from eril; and these two I had thought to send




back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of
their country, to warn the eole of their danger. In any case, I judge that
the younger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My heart is against
his going.'

'Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in rison, or send me
home tied in a sack,' said Piin. 'For otherwise I shall follow the
Comany.’

'Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the
tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Comany must deart.'

The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade
was traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent Moon and the
rayed Sun, and about them was written many runes; for Aragorn son of
Arathorn was going to war uon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was that
sword when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it,
and the light of the moon shone cold, and its edge was hard and keen. And
Aragorn gave it a new name and called it And®ril, Flame of the West.

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat seaking of their road and
the erils they would meet; and they ondered the storied and figured mas
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with
them; but he was content to lean on their guidance, and he sent as much
time as he could with Bilbo.

In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren
and L®thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry
and Piin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in
his own small room. Then Bilbo would read assages from his book (which
still seemed very incomlete), or scras of his verses, or would take notes
of Frodo's adventures.

On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and the old
hobbit ulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted the lid and
fumbled inside.

'Here is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it
to kee it safe but I've forgotten to ask if the smiths could mend it. No
time now.. So I thought, erhas, you would care to have this, don't you
know?'

He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.
Then he drew it, and its olished and well-tended blade glittered suddenly,




cold and bright. This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effort
dee into a wooden beam. 'Take it, if you like. I shan’t want it again, I
exect.'

Frodo acceted it gratefully.

'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a arcel which seemed to
be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth, and
held u a small shirt of mail. It was close-woven of many rings, as sule
almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit
silver, and was studded with white gems. With it was a belt of earl and
crystal.

'It's a retty thing, isn't it?' said Bilbo, moving it in the light.

'And useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. I got it back from
Michel Delving before I started, and acked it with my luggage: I brought
all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, excet the Ring. But I did not
exect to use this, and I don't need it now, excet to look at sometimes.

You hardly feel any weight when you ut it on.'

'I should look — well, I don't think I should look right in it,' said
Frodo.

'Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. You
can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share this secret
with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should feel haier if I knew you
were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black
Riders,' he ended in a low voice.

'Very well, I will take it,' said Frodo. Bilbo ut it on him, and
fastened Sting uon the glittering belt; and then Frodo ut over the to his
old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.

'Just a lain hobbit you look,' said Bilbo. 'But there is more about
you now than aears on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and
looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune.

'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our ast
kindnesses,' said Frodo.

'Don't try!' said the old hobbit, turning round and slaing him on the
back. 'Ow!' he cried. 'You are too hard now to sla! But there you are:
Hobbits must stick together, and esecially Bagginses. All I ask in return
is: take as much care of yourself as you can. and bring back all the news
you can, and any old songs and tales you can come by. I’ll do my best to
finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if




I am sared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly.



I sit beside the fire and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-flowers and butterflies
in summers that have been;

Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind uon my hair.

I sit beside the fire and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a sring
that I shall ever see.

For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every sring
there is a different green.

I sit beside the fire and think
of eole long ago,
and eole who will see a world
that I shall never know.

But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,

I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.

It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East Wind was
streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark
ines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead, dark and low. As
the cheerless shadows of the early evening began to fall the Comany made
ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond counselled them to




journey under cover of night as often as they could, until they were far
from Ri vendell.

'You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I
do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached
him, and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his sies on foot and wing
will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky above you must beware
as you go on your way.'

The Comany took little gear of war, for their hoe was in secrecy not
in battle. Aragorn had And®ril but no other weaon, and he went forth clad
only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a
long sword, in fashion like And®ril but of less lineage and he bore also a
shield and his war -horn.

'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,' he said, 'and
then let all the foes of Gondor flee!’ Putting it to his lis he blew a
blast, and the echoes leat from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice
in Rivendell srang to their feet.

Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir, said Elrond.
'until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and dire need is on
you.'

'Maybe,' said Boromir. 'But always I have let my horn cry at setting
forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth
as a thief in the night.'

Gimli the dwarf alone wore oenly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed axe.
Legolas had a bow and a uiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The
younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but
Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden.
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring,
the mate of Orcrist that lay now uon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely
Mountain.

All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they had
jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Sare food and clothes and blankets and
other needs were laden on a ony, none other than the oor beast that they
had brought from Bree.

?he stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on him: he
was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was Sam who had
insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would ine,




if he did not come.

'That animal can nearly talk,' he said, 'and would talk, if he stayed
here much longer. He gave me a look as lain as Mr. Piin could seak it:
if you don't let me go with you, Sam, I'll follow on my own.' So Bill was
going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Comany that
did not seem deressed.

Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A
gleam of firelight came from the oen doors, and soft lights were glowing in
many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the doorste beside
Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey shaes in the
darkness.

Sam was standing by the ony, sucking his teeth, and staring moodily
into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his desire for
adventure was at its lowest ebb.

'Bill, my lad,’ he said, 'you oughtn't to have took u with us. You
could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.' Bill
swished his tail and said nothing.

Sam eased the ack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in his
mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgotten
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt
that he always carried and refilled when he could; a good suly of
ie- weed (but not near enough, I'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen
hose: linen; various small belongings of his master's that Frodo had
forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in triumh when they were
called for. He went through them all.

'Roe!' he muttered. 'No roe! And only last night you said to
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of roe? You'll want it, if you haven't got
it:" Well, I'll want it. I can't get it now.'

At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the Comany
to him. 'This is my last word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is
setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid:
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy
nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Comany and the
Council, and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free
comanions, to hel him on his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn




aside into other aths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy
will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further
than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you
cannot foresee what each may meet uon the road.'

'Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli.

'Maybe,' said Elrond, 'but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has
not seen the nightfall.'

'Yet sworn word may strengthen uaking heart,' said Gimli.

'Or break it,' said Elrond. 'Look not too far ahead! But go now with
good hearts ! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free
Folk go with you. May the stars shine uon your faces!’

'Good . . . good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 'I don't
suose you will be able to kee a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall exect a
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!'

Many others of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched them
go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was no laughter, and no
song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk.

They crossed the bridge and wound slowly u the long stee aths that
led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high
moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then with one glance at the
Last Flomely Flouse twinkling below them they strode away far into the night.

At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went
on by narrow aths among the folded lands. Their urose was to hold this
course west of the Mountains for many miles and days. The country was
much

rougher and more barren than in the green vale of the Great River in
Wilderland on the other side of the range, and their going would be slow;
but they hoed in this way to escae the notice of unfriendly eyes. The
sies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this emty country, and the
aths were little known excet to the eole of Rivendell.

Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this land
even in the dark. The others were in file behind, and Legolas whose eyes
were keen was the rearguard. The first art of their journey was hard and
dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed
able to kee out its searching fingers. Though the Comany was well clad,
they seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slet uneasily during




the middle of the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the
tangled thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many laces. In the late
afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and
cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a fire. In
the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward as they could
find a way.

At first it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and
stumbled until they were weary, they were creeing forward like snails, and
getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same as it had the day
before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing nearer. South of Rivendell
they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the feet of the main
range there was tumbled an ever wider land of bleak hills, and dee valleys
filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often
only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swams.

They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind
suddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The swift-flowing clouds
lifted and melted away, and the sun came out, ale and bright. There came a
cold clear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly -trees whose grey-green trunks
seemed to have been built out of the very stone of the hills. Their dark
leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.

Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shaes of lofty mountains
that seemed now to stand across the ath that the Comany was taking. At the
left of this high range rose three eaks; the tallest and nearest stood u
like a tooth tied with snow; its great, bare, northern reciice was still
largely in the shadow, but where the sunlight slanted uon it, it glowed
red.

Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. 'We have
done well,’ he said. 'We have reached the borders of the country that Men
call Hollin; many Elves lived here in haier days, when Eregion was its
name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many
long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be
milder now, but erhas all the more dangerous.’

'Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.

’But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Piin. 'We must have turned
eastwards in the night.’




'No,' said Gandalf. 'But you see further ahead in the clear light.

Beyond those eaks the range bends round south-west. There are many mas
in

Elrond's house, but I suose you never thought to look at them?'

'Yes I did, sometimes,' said Piin, 'but I don't remember them. Frodo
has a better head for that sort of thing.'

'I need no ma,' said Gimli, who had come u with Legolas, and was
gazing out before him with a strange light in his dee eyes. 'There is the
land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought the image of those
mountains into many works of metal and of stone, and into many songs and
tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathyr.

'Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I know
them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-dym, the Dwarrowdelf, that
is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. Yonder stands
Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine and
Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White, and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call
Zirak-zigil and Bundushathyr.

'There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies the
dee-shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale,
which the Elves call Nanduhirion.'

'It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,' said Gandalf. 'If we
climb the ass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side of
Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the dee vale of the
Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in
its icy srings.’

'Dark is the water of Kheled-zvram,' said Gimli, 'and cold are the
srings of Kibil-nvla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may see them
soon.'

'May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf f said Gandalf. 'But
whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down
the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the Great River, and then

f

He aused.

'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry.

'To the end of the ourney — in the end,' said Gandalf. 'We cannot
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I
think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There is a




wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly
forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’

That is true,' said Legolas. 'But the Elves of this land were of a
race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not
now remember them: Only I hear the stones lament them: dee they delved us,
fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are gone. They are
gone. They sought the Elavens long ago.'

That morning they lit a fire in a dee hollow shrouded by great bushes
of holly, and their suer -breakfast was merrier than it had been since they
set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they exected to have all
the night to slee in, and they did not mean to go on again until the
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while
he left the Comany and wandered on to the ridge; there he stood in the
shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and westwards, with his head osed
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked
down at the others laughing and talking.

'What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called u. ’What are you looking
for? Do you miss the East Wind?’

’No indeed,’ he answered. 'But I miss something. I have been in the
country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but many other
creatures live here at all times, esecially birds. Yet now all things but
you are silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles about us, and
your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.’

Gandalf looked u with sudden interest. 'But what do you guess is the
reason?’ he asked. 'Is there more in it than surrise at seeing four
hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where eole are so seldom seen or
heard?’

'I hoe that is it,’ answered Aragorn. 'But I have a sense of
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’

"Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ’If you bring a Ranger
with you, it is well to ay attention to him, esecially if the Ranger is
Aragorn. We must sto talking aloud, rest uietly, and set the watch.’

It was Sam’s turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn oined
him. The others fell aslee. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it.

The breathing of the sleeers could be lainly heard. The swish of the
ony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam
could hear his own oints creaking, if he stirred. Dead silence was around




him, and over all hung a clear blue sky, as the Sun rode u from the East.
Away in the South a dark atch aeared, and grew, and drove north like
flying smoke in the wind.

'What's that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,' said Sam in a
whiser to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the sky;
but before long Sam could see for himself what was aroaching. Flocks of
birds, flying at great seed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all
the land as if they were searching for something; and they were steadily
drawing nearer.

'Lie flat and still!' hissed Aragorn, ulling Sam down into the shade
of a holly -bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from
the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought
they were a kind of crow of large size. As they assed overhead, in so dense
a throng that their shadow followed them darkly over the ground below, one
harsh croak was heard.

Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the
sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he srang u and went and
wakened Gandalf.

'Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between the
Mountains and the Greyflood,' he said, 'and they have assed over Hollin.
They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do
not know what they are about: ossibly there is some trouble away south from
which they are fleeing; but I think they are sying out the land. I have
also glimsed many hawks flying high u in the sky. I think we ought to move
again this evening. Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being
watched.'

'And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,' said Gandalf; 'and how we
can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of
that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you
are right.'

'Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low before the
crebain came,' said Aragorn. 'It must be ut out and not lit again.'

'Well if that isn't a lague and a nuisance!' said Piin. The news: no
fire, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke
in the late afternoon. 'All because of a ack of crows! I had looked forward
to a real good meal tonight: something hot.'

'Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. 'There may be many




unexected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a ie to smoke in
comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate:
it will get warmer as we get south.'

'Too warm, I shouldn't wonder,' muttered Sam to Frodo. 'But I'm
beginning to think it's time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain and saw
the end of the Road, so to seak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn,
or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli soke his iece. A fair
aw-cracker dwarf-language must be!' Mas conveyed nothing to Sam's mind,
and all distances in these strange lands seemed so vast that he was uite
out of his reckoning.

All that day the Comany remained in hiding. The dark birds assed over
now and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they disaeared
southwards. At dusk the Comany set out, and turning now half east they
steered their course towards Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly
red in the last light of the vanished Sun. One by one white stars srang
forth as the sky faded.

Guided by Aragorn they struck a good ath. It looked to Frodo like the
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and well lanned, from
Hollin to the mountain-ass. The Moon, now at the full, rose over the
mountains, and cast a ale light in which the shadows of stones were black.
Many of them looked to have been worked by hands, though now they lay
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land.

It was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon
was low. Frodo looked u at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt a shadow ass
over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and then flashed out
again. He shivered.

'Did you see anything ass over?' he whisered to Gandalf, who was ust
ahead.

'No, but I felt it, whatever it was,' he answered. 'It may be nothing,
only a wis of thin cloud.'

'It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, 'and not with the wind.'

Nothing further haened that night. The next morning dawned even
brighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the wind was
turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing
steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound u into the hills, and the
mountains towered u, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose
before them, a mighty eak, tied with snow like silver, but with sheer




naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood.

There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind had
gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back.

'Winter deeens behind us,' he said uietly to Aragorn. 'The heights
away north are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down their
shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high u towards the Redhorn Gate.
We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow ath, and waylaid by some
evil; but the weather may rove a more deadly enemy than any. What do you
think of your course now, Aragorn?'

Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn
were continuing some debate that had begun long before. He listened
anxiously.

'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well,
Gandalf,' answered Aragorn. 'And erils known and unknown will grow as we
go

on. But we must go on; and it is no good our delaying the assage of the
mountains. Further south there are no asses, till one comes to the Ga of
Rohan. I do not trust that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows
which

side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?’

'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. 'But there is another way, and not by
the ass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have soken of.’

'But let us not seak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others I
beg, not until it is lain that there is no other way.'

'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf.

'Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest and
slee,' said Aragorn.

In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast,

Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its
sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo
watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned
to

the Comany Gandalf soke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face
the weather and the high ass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned.

'From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ’I fear that the




Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that is
coming u behind. Snow may come. We must go with all the seed that we
can.

Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the to of the
ass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leave as soon as you can
get ready.'

'I will add a word of advice, if I may,' said Boromir. 'I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of ourneys
in

the high laces. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down
on the other side. It will not hel us to kee so secret that we are frozen
to death. When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes,
each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'

'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't you lad?' said Sam. The ony
looked at him mournfully.

'Very well,' said Gandalf. 'But we must not use the wood — not unless
it is a choice between fire and death.'

The Comany set out again with good seed at first; but soon their way
became stee and difficult. The twisting and climbing road had in many
laces almost disaeared, and was blocked with many fallen stones. The
night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter wind swirled among the
rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The
narrow ath now wound under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which
the grim flanks of Caradhras towered u invisible in the gloom; on the right
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a dee ravine.

Laboriously they climbed a shar sloe and halted for a moment at the
to. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He ut out his arm and saw the dim
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve.

They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, filling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shaes of Gandalf and
Aragorn only a ace or two ahead could hardly be seen.

'I don't like this at all,' anted Sam ust behind. 'Snow's all right
on a fine morning, but I like to be in bed while it's falling. I wish this
lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.' Excet on the
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and was
regarded as a leasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit (save




Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 131 1, when the white wolves
invaded

the Shire over the frozen Brandywine.

Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was
already ankle-dee about his boots.

"This is what I feared,' he said. 'What do you say now, Aragorn?'

'That I feared it too,' Aragorn answered, 'but less than other things.

I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save
high u in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we are still far down,
where the aths are usually oen all the winter.'

'I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,' said Boromir. "They
say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that
stand uon the borders of Mordor. He has strange owers and many allies.'

'His arm has grown long indeed,' said Gimli, 'if he can draw snow down
from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.'

'His arm has grown long,' said Gandalf.

While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened
until it almost ceased. They tramed on again. But they had not gone more
than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled
and the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to
kee going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind the taller
folk, but it was lain that they could not go much further, if the snow
continued. Frodo's feet felt like lead. Piin was dragging behind. Even
Gimli, as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.

The Comany halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreement
without any words being soken. They heard eerie noises in the darkness
round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind in the cracks and
gullies of the rocky wall, but the sounds were those of shrill cries, and
wild howls of laughter. Stones began to fall from the mountain-side,
whistling over their heads, or crashing on the ath beside them. Every now
and again they heard a dull rumble, as a great boulder rolled down from
hidden heights above.

'We cannot go further tonight,' said Boromir. 'Let those call it the
wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are aimed
at us.'

'I do call it the wind,' said Aragorn. 'But that does not make what you
say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have




little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are not in league with
Sauron, but have uroses of their own. Some have been in this world longer
than he.’

’Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, 'long
years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.'

'It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack;
said Gandalf.

'But what can we do?' cried Piin miserably. He was leaning on Merry
and Frodo, and he was shivering.

'Either sto where we are, or go back,' said Gandalf. ’It is no good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this ath leaves the
cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard
sloe. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones — or anything
else.'

'And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. 'We
have assed no lace on the way u that offered more shelter than this
cliff-wall we are under now.'

'Shelter!' muttered Sam. 'If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof
make a house.'

The Comany now gathered together as close to the cliff as they could.

It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little, so that
they hoed it would give them some rotection from the northerly wind and
from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from every
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds.

They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the ony stood
atiently but deectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened them a
little; but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks, and it went
on mounting. If they had had no larger comanions the hobbits would soon
have been entirely buried.

A great sleeiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes, and out of the
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice seaking. /
don 't think much of your diary , he said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth:
there was no need to come back to reort that!

But I wanted rest and slee, Bilbo , Frodo answered with an effort, when
he felt himself shaken, and he came back ainfully to wakefulness. Boromir
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.




'This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,' said Boromir. 'It
is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must do
something to save ourselves.’

'Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his ack and drawing out a
leathern flask. 'Just a mouthful each — for all of us. It is very recious.

It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our arting.

Pass it round!’

As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liuor
he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left his limbs.

The others also revived and found fresh hoe and vigour. But the snow did
not relent. It whirled about them thicker than ever, and the wind blew
louder.

’What do you say to fire?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ’The choice seems
near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from
all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not hel
us.’

’You may make a fire, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ’If there are any
watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.’ But
though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice of Boromir, it
assed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid
the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf
himself took a hand. Picking u a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and
then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen ! he thrust the end of his
staff into the midst of it. At once a great sout of green and blue flame
srang out, and the wood flared and suttered.

'If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he
said. ’I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’

But the Comany cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes. Their
hearts were reoiced to see the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily;
and though all round it the snow hissed, and ools of slush cret under
their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the blaze. There they stood,
stooing in a circle round the little dancing and blowing flames. A red
light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a
black wall.

But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.

The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on.




The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.'

'If any dawn can ierce these clouds,' said Gimli.

Boromir steed out of the circle and stared u into the blackness.

'The snow is growing less,' he said, 'and the wind is uieter.'

Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes still falling out of the dark to be
revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying fire; but for a long
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly, as slee was
beginning to cree over him again, he was aware that the wind had indeed
fallen, and the flakes were becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly a dim
light began to grow. At last the snow stoed altogether.

As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world. Below
their refuge were white hums and domes and shaeless dees beneath which
the ath that they had trodden was altogether lost; but the heights above
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.

Gimli looked u and shook his head. 'Caradhras has not forgiven us.' he
said. 'He has more snow yet to fling at us, if we go on. The sooner we go
back and down the better.'

To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difficult. It might well
rove imossible. Only a few aces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay
many feet dee, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in laces it had been
scooed and iled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff.

'If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a
ath for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone
of the Comany remained still light of heart.

'If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save
us,’ answered Gandalf. 'But I must have something to work on. I cannot burn
snow.’

'Well,' said Boromir, 'when heads are at a loss bodies must serve, as
we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See! Though all
is now snow-clad, our ath, as we came u, turned about that shoulder of
rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we
could reach that oint, maybe it would rove easier beyond. It is no more
than a furlong off, I guess.'

'Then let us force a ath thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn.

Aragorn was the tallest of the Comany, but Boromir, little less in
height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and Aragorn
followed him. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling heavily. In




laces the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir seemed to be swimming
or

burrowing with his great arms rather than walking.

Legolas watched them for a while with a smile uon his lis, and then
he turned to the others. 'The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say:
let a loughman lough, but choose an otter for swimming, and for running
light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.'

With that he srang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if for the
first time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but wore
only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imrint in the
snow.

'Farewell!' he said to Gandalf. 'I go to find the Sun!' Then swift as a
runner over firm sand he shot away, and uickly overtaking the toiling men,
with a wave of his hand he assed them, and sed into the distance, and
vanished round the rocky turn.

The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorn
dwindled into black secks in the whiteness. At length they too assed from
sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow
came curling down again.

An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last
they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir and Aragorn
reaeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring u the sloe.

'Well,' cried Legolas as he ran u, 'I have not brought the Sun. She is
walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this
Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam of
good hoe for those who are doomed to go on feet. There is the greatest
wind-drift of all ust beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almost
buried. They desaired, until I returned and told them that the drift was
little wider than a wall. And on the other side the snow suddenly grows
less, while further down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a
hobbit's toes.'

'Ah, it is as I said,' growled Gimli. 'It was no ordinary storm. It is
the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and that
drift was laid to cut off our escae.'

'But haily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you,'
said Boromir, who came u at that moment. 'And doughty Men too, if I may
say




it; though lesser men with sades might have served you better. Still, we
have thrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be grateful
who cannot run as light as Elves.'

'But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through the
drift?' said Piin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.

'Have hoe!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength
left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others no doubt
will make shift to tread the ath behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will
begin with you.'

He lifted u the hobbit. 'Cling to my back! I shall need my arms' he
said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Piin marvelled at
his strength, seeing the assage that he had already forced with no other
tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the
track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went.

They came at length to the great drift. It was flung across the
mountain-ath like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, shar as if
shaed with knives, reared u more than twice the height of Boromir; but
through the middle a assage had been beaten, rising and falling like a
bridge. On the far side Merry and Piin were set down, and there they
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Comany to arrive.

After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow but
now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli erched among
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They assed through the lane;
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a dee rumble there rolled
down a fall of stones and slithering snow. The sray of it half blinded the
Comany as they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again
they saw that the ath was blocked behind them.

'Enough, enough!' cried Gimli. 'We are dearting as uickly as we may!'
And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain seemed to be
exended, as if Caradhras was satisfied that the invaders had been beaten
off and would not dare to return. The threat of snow lifted; the clouds
began to break and the light grew broader.

As Legolas had reorted, they found that the snow became steadily more
shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon
they all stood once more on the flat shelf at the head of the stee sloe
where they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before.

The morning was now far advanced. From the high lace they looked back




westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble of country that lay
at the foot of the mountain was the dell from which they had started to
climb the ass.

Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head
was diy as he thought of the long and ainful march downhill. Black secks
swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black secks remained. In the
distance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots were
circling in the air.

'The birds again!’ said Aragorn, ointing down.

That cannot be heled now,’ said Gandalf. 'Whether they are good or
evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down at once. Not
even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!’

A cold wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on the
Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the sloe. Caradhras had defeated
them.




Chater 4 . A Journey in the Dark



It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were veiled in
deeening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf sared them one more
mouthful

each of the miruvor of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a
council.

'We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,' he said. 'The attack on
the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.'

'And then where are we to go? ’ asked Frodo.

'We still have our ourney and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.

'We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'

Piin's face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked u hoefully. But Aragorn and Boromir
made

no sign. Frodo looked troubled.

'I wish I was back there,’ he said. 'But how can I return without shame
— unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? ’

'You are right, Frodo,' said Gandalf: 'to go back is to admit defeat
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must remain
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell
will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed.

The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they are only shadows yet of the
ower and terror they would ossess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's
hand again.'

'Then we must go on, if there is a way,' said Frodo with a sigh. Sam
sank back into gloom.

'There is a way that we may attemt,' said Gandalf. I thought from the
beginning, when first I considered this ourney, that we should try it. But
it is not a leasant way, and I have not soken of it to the Comany before.
Aragorn was against it, until the ass over the mountains had at least been
tried.'

'If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil




indeed,' said Merry. 'But you had better tell us about it, and let us know
the worst at once.'

'The road that I seak of leads to the Mines of Moria,' said Gandalf.

Only Gimli lifted u his head; a smouldering fire was in his eyes. On all
the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it
was a legend of vague fear:

'The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hoe that it will lead
through Moria? ’ said Aragorn darkly.

'It is a name of ill omen,' said Boromir. 'Nor do I see the need to go
there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us ourney southwards, until we
come to the Ga of Rohan, where men are friendly to my eole, taking the
road that I followed on my way hither. Or we might ass by and cross the
Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions
nigh to the sea.’

'Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf.
'Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him I may have business
of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that
can by any means be revented. The Ga of Rohan is closed to us while we go
with the Bearer.

'As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might send a
year in such a ourney, and we should ass through many lands that are emty
and harbourless. Yet they would not be safe. The watchful eyes both of
Saruman and of the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, you
were

in the Enemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of
small concern to him: his mind was busy with the ursuit of the Ring. But
you return now as a member of the Ring's Comany, and you are in eril as
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with every league that
we go south under the naked sky.

'Since our oen attemt on the mountain -ass our light has become more
deserate, I fear. I see now little hoe, if we do not soon vanish from
sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go
neither over the mountains, nor round them, but under them. That is a road
at any rate that the Enemy will least exect us to take.’

'We do not know what he exects,' said Boromir. 'lie may watch all
roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be to walk
into a tra, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower




itself. The name of Moria is black.'

'You seak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to the
stronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf. 'I alone of you have ever been in
the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older and lesser dwelling in
Dol Guldur. Those who ass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I would
not lead you into Moria if there were no hoe of coming out again. If there
are Ores there, it may rove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Ores
of the Misty Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five
Armies. The Eagles reort that Ores are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hoe that Moria is still free.

'There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some dee
hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may rove,
one must tread the ath that need chooses!’

’I will tread the ath with you, Gandalf! ’ said Gimli. ’I will go and
look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there-if you can find the
doors that are shut.’

'Good, Gimli! ' said Gandalf. 'You encourage me. We will seek the
hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins of the
Dwarves, a dwarfs head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or
Hobbits. Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I
sought there long for Thrbin son of Thrur after he was lost. I assed
through, and I came out again alive! ’

'I too once assed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn uietly; 'but though
I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria
a second time.'

'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Piin.

'Nor me,' muttered Sam.

'Of course not! ' said Gandalf. 'Who would? But the uestion is: who
will follow me, if I lead you there? '

'I will,' said Gimli eagerly.

'I will,' said Aragorn heavily. 'You followed my lead almost to
disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow your
lead now — if this last warning does not move you. It is not of the Ring,
nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to
you: if you ass the doors of Moria, beware! ’

'I will not go,' said Boromir; 'not unless the vote of the whole
comany is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The




Ring-bearer's voice surely should be heard? ’

I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.

The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo soke. 'I
do not wish to go,' he said; 'but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of
Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slet on it.
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold
gloom. How the wind howls ! '

At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round
them in the emty saces of the night.

Suddenly Aragorn leat to his feet. 'How the wind howls ! ' he cried.

'It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of the Mountains!

f

'Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. 'It is as I said. The
hunt is u! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to ourney
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? ’

'How far is Moria? ' asked Boromir.

'There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the
crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,' answered Gandalf grimly.

'Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,' said
Boromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the ore that one fears.'

'True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. 'But where the
warg howls, there also the ore rowls.'

'I wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Piin to Sam. I am no
good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer
in me: these howls freee my blood. I don't ever remember feeling so
wretched.'

'My heart's right down in my toes, Mr. Piin,' said Sam. 'But we
aren't etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever may
be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolfs belly.'

For their defence in the night the Comany climbed to the to of the
small hill under which they had been sheltering, it was crowned with a knot
of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones.

In the midst of this they lit a fire, for there was no hoe that darkness
and silence would kee their trail from discovery by the hunting acks.

Round the fire they sat, and those that were not on guard doed
uneasily. Poor Bill the ony trembled and sweated where he stood. The




howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and
sometimes

further off. In the dead of the night many shining eyes were seen eering
over the brow of the hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a
ga in the circle a great dark wolf-shae could be seen halted, gaing at
them. A shuddering howl broke from him, as if he were a catain summoning
his ack to the assault.

Gandalf stood u and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen,

Hound of Sauron! ’ he cried. 'Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foul
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.'

The wolf snarled and srang towards them with a great lea. At that
moment there was a shar twang. Legolas had loosed his bow. There was a
hideous yell, and the leaing shae thudded to the ground; the elvish arrow
had ierced its throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished.
Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting
acks had fled. All about them the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on
the sighing wind.

The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting, gleaming
fitfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started from slee.
Without warning a storm of howls broke out fierce and wild all about the
cam. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them
from every side at once.

'Fling fuel on the fire!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. 'Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!’

In the leaing light, as the fresh wood blaed u, Frodo saw many grey
shaes sring over the ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the
throat of one huge leader Aragorn assed his sword with a thrust; with a
great swee Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood
with

his stout legs aart, wielding his dwarf-axe. The bow of Legolas was
singing.

In the wavering firelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose u,
a great menacing shae like the monument of some ancient king of stone set
uon a hill. Stooing like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to
meet the wolves. They gave back before him. High in the air he tossed the
blaing brand. It flared with a sudden white radiance like lightning; and
his voice rolled like thunder.




' Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!' he cried.

There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into a
leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leat from tree-to to tree -to.

The whole hill was crowned with daling light. The swords and knives of the
defenders shone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the air
as it flew, and lunged burning into the heart of a great wolf-chieftain.

All the others fled.

Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash and sarks;
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stums, and blew darkly from the
hill, as the first light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their enemies were
routed and did not return.

'What did I tell you, Mr. Piin? ' said Sam, she/thing his sword.

'Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-oener, and no mistake! Nearly singed
the hair off my head!’

When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to
be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead. No trace of
the fight remained but the charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on
the hill-to. All were undamaged save one of which only the oint was left.

'It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. 'These were no ordinary wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat uickly and go!’

That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command
of some ower that had no longer any use for snow, since they had retreated
from the ass, a ower that wished now to have a clear light in which things
that moved in the wild could be seen from far away. The wind had been
turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The
clouds vanished southwards and the sky was oened, high and blue. As they
stood uon the hill-side, ready to deart, a ale sunlight gleamed over the
mountain-tos.

'We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ’or I fear we
shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our ath may be winding, for
here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only
once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago.

'There it lies,’ he said, ointing away south-eastwards to where the
mountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the distance
could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst, taller than
the rest, one great grey wall. 'When we left the ass I led you southwards,
and not back to our starting oint, as some of you may have noticed. It is




well that I did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and haste
is needed. Let us go! '

'I do not know which to hoe,' said Boromir grimly: 'that Gandalf will
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall
the likeliest chance. Lead on!’

Gimli now walked ahead by the wiard’s side, so eager was he to come to
Moria. Together they led the Comany back towards the mountains. The only
road of old to Moria from the west had lain along the course of a stream,
the Sirannon, that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors
had stood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land had changed in
recent years; for he did not strike the stream where he looked to find it,
only a few miles southwards from their start.

The morning was assing towards noon, and still the Comany wandered
and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere could they see any
gleam of water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts
sank. They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the
night would bring, if it caught them in that lost land, none of them cared
to think.

Suddenly Gimli, who had ressed on ahead, called back to them. He was
standing on a knoll and ointing to the right. Hurrying u they saw below
them a dee and narrow channel. It was emty and silent, and hardly a
trickle of water flowed among the brown and red-stained stones of its bed;
but on the near side there was a ath, much broken and decayed, that wound
its way among the ruined walls and aving-stones of an ancient highroad.

’Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. 'This is where the stream ran:

Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has haened to
the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy. Come! We must
hurry on. We are late.'

The Comany were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly along
the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and
began to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty meal they went on again.
Before them the mountains frowned, but their ath lay in a dee trough of
land and they could see only the higher shoulders and the far eastward
eaks.

At length they came to a shar bend. There the road, which had been
veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a stee fall of the




land to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding the corner they
saw before them a low cliff, some five fathoms high, with a broken and
agged to. Over it a trickling water dried, through a wide cleft that
seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been strong and full.

'Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. 'But there is no mistaking
the lace. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember
right, there was a flight of stes cut in the rock at their side, but the
main road wound away left and climbed with several loos u to the level
ground at the to. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right
u to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it with the road
beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now ! '

They found the stone stes without difficulty, and Gimli srang swiftly
u them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the to they saw
that they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying u of
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind them the sinking Sun filled the cool
western sky with glimmering gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake.
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had
been dammed and had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces allid in the fading light: final and
imassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a fissure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.

'There are the Walls of Moria,' said Gandalf, ointing across the
water. 'And there the Gate stood once uon a time, the Elven Door at the end
of the road from Flollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None
of the Comany, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at the end of
the day. It has an unwholesome look.’

'We must find a way round the northern edge,' said Gimli. 'The first
thing for the Comany to do is to climb u by the main ath and see where
that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could not get our
baggage-ony u this stair.'

'But in any case we cannot take the oor beast into the Mines,’ said
Gandalf. 'The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are laces
narrow and stee which he cannot tread, even if we can.’

'Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. 'I had not thought of that. And oor Sam!

I wonder what he will say? ’

'I am sorry,' said Gandalf. 'Poor Bill has been a useful comanion and
it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter




and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.’

The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the sky
high above the sunset, when the Comany, with all the seed they could,
climbed u the sloes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked
to be no more than two or three furlongs at the widest oint. How far it
stretched away southward they could not see in the failing light; but its
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between
the stony ridges that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a
rim of oen ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two
to go before they could reach the oint on the far shore that Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to find the doors.

When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found a
narrow creek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant, thrust out
like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode forward
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-dee at
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for
under the weedy ools were sliding and greasy stones, and footing was
treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust at the touch of the dark unclean
water on his feet.

As Sam, the last of the Comany, led Bill u on to the dry ground on
the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a lo, as if a
fish had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning uickly they saw
riles, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great rings were
widening outwards from a oint far out in the lake. There was a bubbling
noise, and then silence. The dusk deeened, and the last gleams of the
sunset were veiled in cloud.

Gandalf now ressed on at a great ace, and the others followed as
uickly as they could. They reached the stri of dry land between the lake
and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a doen yards across, and
encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found a way, hugging the
cliff, and keeing as far from the dark water as they might. A mile
southwards along the shore they came uon holly trees. Stums and dead
boughs were rotting in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,
or of a hedge that had once lined the road across the drowned valley. But
close under the cliff there stood, still strong and living, . two tall
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined.




Their great roots sread from the wall to the water. Under the looming
cliffs they had looked like mere bushes, when seen far off from the to of
the Stair; but now they towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing
dee night-shadows about their feet, standing like sentinel illars at the
end of the road.

'Well, here we are at last! 'said Gandalf. 'Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the eole of that land, and they
lanted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West -door was made
chiefly for their use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were
haier days, when there was still close friendshi at times between folk of
different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.'

'It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendshi waned,' said
Gimli.

'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas.

'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give udgement now.

But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to hel
me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find
them the better. Night is at hand! '

Turning to the others he said: 'While I am searching, will you each
make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we must say farewell to our
good beast of burden. You must lay aside much of the stuff that we brought
against bitter weather: you will not need it inside, nor, I hoe, when we
come through and ourney on down into the South. Instead each of us must
take a share of what the ony carried, esecially the food and the
water-skins.'

'But you can't leave oor old Bill behind in this forsaken lace, Mr.
Gandalf! ' cried Sam, angry and distressed. 'I won't have it, and that's
flat. After he has come so far and all ! '

'I am sorry, Sam,' said the wiard. 'But when the Door oens I do not
think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long dark of
Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.’

'He'd follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon's den, if I led him,' rotested
Sam. 'It'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about.'

'It will be short of murder, I hoe,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand on
the ony's head, and soke in a low voice. 'Go with words of guard and
guiding on you,’ he said. 'You are a wise beast, and have learned much in




Rivendell. Make your ways to laces where you can find grass, and so come in
time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go.

'There, Sam! He will have uite as much chance of escaing wolves and
getting home as we have.’

Sam stood sullenly by the ony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to
understand well what was going on, nuled u to him, utting his nose to
Sam's ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled with the stras, unlading all
the ony's acks and throwing them on the ground. The others sorted out the
goods, making a ile of all that could be left behind, and dividing u the
rest.

When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He aeared to have
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gaing at the blank wall
of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was
wandering about, taing the stone here and there with his axe. Legolas was
ressed against the rock, as if listening.

'Well, here we are and all ready,' said Merry; 'but where are the
Doors? I can't see any sign of them.'

'Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. 'They are
invisible, and their own masters cannot find them or oen them, if their
secret is forgotten.'

'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said
Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round. 'Unless things are
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.’

He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the trees
there was a smooth sace, and over this he assed his hands to and fro,
muttering words under his breath. Then he steed back.

'Look!' he said. 'Can you see anything now?’

The Moon now shone uon the grey face of the rock; but they could see
nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where the wiard's
hands had assed, faint lines aeared, like slender veins of silver running
in the stone. At first they were no more than ale gossamer-threads, so fine
that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon caught them, but steadily
they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed.

At the to, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing
letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were in laces
blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and a hammer




surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these again were two trees,
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth in
the middle of the door a single star with many rays.

'There are the emblems of Dunn!' cried Gimli.

'And there is the Tree of the High Elves!' said Legolas.

'And the Star of the House of Flanor,' said Gandalf. 'They are wrought
of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and slees until it
is touched by one who seaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is
long since I heard them, and I thought deely before I could recall them to
my mind.’

’What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to deciher
the inscrition on the arch. ’I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot
read these.’

'The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth in the
Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ’But they do not say anything of imortance
to us. They say only: The Doors ofDurin, Lord ofMoria. Seak, friend, and
enter. And underneath small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them.
Celebrimbor ofHollin drew these signs.'

'What does it mean by seak, friend, and enter!' asked Merry.

’That is lain enough,’ said Gimli. 'If you are a friend, seak the
assword, and the doors will oen, and you can enter.’

’Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are robably governed by words. Some
dwarf-gates will oen only at secial times, or for articular ersons; and
some have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times and
words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not
secret. They usually stood oen and doorwards sat here. But if they were
shut, any who knew the oening word could seak it and ass in. At least so
it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? '

'It is,' said the dwarf. 'But what the word was is not remembered.

Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’

’But do not you know the word, Gandalf? ’ asked Boromir in surrise.

'No! ’ said the wiard.

The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf well,
remained silent and unmoved.

’Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed sot?’ cried
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. 'You told us that
you had once assed through the Mines. How could that be, if you did not




know how to enter? '

'The answer to your first uestion, Boromir,’ said the wiard, 'is that
I do not know the word-yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he added, with a
glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what is the use
of my deeds when they are roved useless. As for your other uestion: do you
doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left? I did not enter this way. I came
from the East.

'If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors oen outwards.

From the inside you may thrust them oen with your hands. From the outside
nothing will move them save the sell of command. They cannot be forced
inwards.’

'What are you going to do then? ’ asked Piin, undaunted by the
wiard's bristling brows.

'Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. 'But
if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little eace from foolish
uestions, I will seek for the oening words.

'I once knew every sell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or Ores
that was ever used for such a urose. I can still remember ten score of
them without searching in my mind. But only a few trials, I think, will be
needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli for words of the secret
dwarf-tongue that they teach to none. The oening words were Elvish, like
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.'

Ele steed u to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the
silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.

Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!

Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!

he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank
grey stone did not stir.

Many times he reeated these words in different order, or varied them.
Then he tried other sells, one after another, seaking now faster and
louder, now soft and slow. Then he soke many single words of Elvish seech.
Nothing haened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were
kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast.

Again Gandalf aroached the wall, and lifting u his arms he soke in
tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and struck the rock
with his staff. Oen, oen! he shouted, and followed it with the same
command in every language that had ever been soken in the West of




Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground, and sat down in
silence.

At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears the
howling of wolves. Bill the ony started in fear, and Sam srang to his side
and whisered softly to him.

'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we shall need
him still, if the wolves do not find us. How I hate this foul ool! ' He
stooed and icking u a large stone he cast it far into the dark water.

The stone vanished with a soft sla; but at the same instant there was
a swish and a bubble. Great riling rings formed on the surface out beyond
where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards the foot of the
cliff.

’Why did you do that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. V I hate this lace, too,
and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the
doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the ool. Don't disturb it! '

'1 wish we could get away! ' said Merry.

'Why doesn't Gandalf do something uick? ' said Piin.

Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed, either in
desair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was heard
again. The riles on the water grew and came closer; some were already
laing on the shore.

With a suddenness that startled them all the wiard srang to his feet.

He was laughing! V I have it! ' he cried. 'Of course, of course! Absurdly
simle, like most riddles when you see the answer.'

Picking u his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear
voice: Mellon!

The star shone out briefly and faded again. Then silently a great
doorway was outlined, though not a crack or oint had been visible before.
Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch by inch, until both
doors lay back against the wall. Through the oening a shadowy stair could
be seen climbing steely u; but beyond the lower stes the darkness was
deeer than the night. The Comany stared in wonder.

V I was wrong after all,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli too. Merry, of all
eole, was on the right track. The oening word was inscribed on the
archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say "Friend" and
enter. I had only to seak the Elvish word for friend and the doors oened.
Quite simle. Too simle for a learned lore-master in these susicious days.




Those were haier times. Now let us go!'

He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest ste. But at that
moment several things haened. Frodo felt something seie him by the ankle,
and he fell with a cry. Bill the ony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaed after
him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran back again, weeing and cursing.
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host
of snakes were swimming u from the southern end.

Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
ale-green and luminous and wet. Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it
with a knife.

The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam ulled him away, crying out for hel.
Twenty others arms came riling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a
hideous stench.

'Into the gateway! U the stairs! Quick! ' shouted Gandalf leaing
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.

They were ust in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few stes u, and
Gandalf had ust begun to climb, when the groing tentacles writhed across
the narrow shore and fingered the cliff- wall and the doors. One came
wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned
and aused. If he was considering what word would close the gate again from
within, there was no need. Many coiling arms seied the doors on either
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo
they slammed, and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came
dully through the onderous stone.

Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collased on a ste in the black
darkness. 'Poor old Bill! ’ he said in a choking voice. 'Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to choose,
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’

They heard Gandalf go back down the stes and thrust his staff against
the doors. There was a uiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the
doors did not oen. 'Well, well! ’ said the wiard. 'The assage is blocked
behind us now and there is only one way out— on the other side of the
mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been iled u, and the
trees urooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were




beautiful, and had stood so long.'

'I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot
first touched the water,' said Frodo. 'What was the thing, or were there
many of them? '

'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one
urose. Something has cret, or has been driven out of dark waters under
the mountains. There are older and fouler things than Ores in the dee
laces of the world.' He did not seak aloud his thought that whatever it
was that dwelt in the lake, it had seied on Frodo first among all the
Comany.

Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the
sound to a hoarse whiser that all could hear: 'In the dee laces of the
world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who will lead us nowin
this deadly dark? '

'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff!

t

As the wiard assed on ahead u the great stes, he held his staff
aloft, and from its ti there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway was
sound and undamaged. Two hundred stes they counted, broad and shallow;
and

at the to they found an arched assage with a level floor leading on into
the dark.

'Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can't find a dining-room! ' said Frodo. He had begun to shake off
the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry.

The roosal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the uer stes,
dim figures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf gave them each a
third si of the miruvor of Rivendell.

'It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; 'but I think we
need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck, we
shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go carefully with
the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines, but they
should not be touched. We may not have a chance of filling our skins and
bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.'

'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo.

'I cannot say,' answered Gandalf. 'It deends on many chances. But
going straight, without misha or losing our way, we shall take three or




four marches, I exect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West -door to
East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.'

After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager
to get the ourney over as uickly as ossible, and were willing, tired as
they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in
front as before. In his left hand he held u his glimmering staff, the light
of which ust showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his
sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting
or of Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish
smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Ores
were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked
Aragorn.

The assage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend. It
went steadily down for a long while before it became level once again. The
air grew hot and stifling, but it was not foul, and at times they felt
currents of cooler air uon their faces, issuing from half-guessed oenings
in the walls. There were many of these. In the ale ray of the wiard's
staff, Frodo caught glimses of stairs and arches and of other assages and
tunnels, sloing u, or running steely down, or oening blankly dark on
either side. It was bewildering beyond hoe of remembering.

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, excet by his stout courage. At least
he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere darkness in
itself. Often the wiard consulted him at oints where the choice of way was
doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had the final word. The Mines of
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, Gluin's son,
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of
a ourney long before were now of little hel, but even in the gloom and
desite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did
not falter, as long as there was a ath that led towards his goal.

'Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a ause longer than usual,
and Gandalf and Gimli were whisering together; the others were crowded
behind, waiting anxiously. 'Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a
ourney, if never on one so dark; and there are tales of Rivendell of
greater deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray-if




there is any ath to find. He has led us in here against our fears, but he
will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is surer of finding
the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Ber®thiel.'

It was well for the Comany that they had such a guide. They had no
fuel nor any means of making torches; in the deserate scramble at the doors
many things had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have
come to grief. There were not only many roads to choose from, there were
also in many laces holes and itfalls, and dark wells beside the ath in
which their assing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls
and floor, and every now and then a crack would oen right before their
feet. The widest was more than seven feet across, and it was long before
Piin could summon enough courage to lea over the dreadful ga. The noise
of churning water came u from far below, as if some great mill-wheel was
turning in the deths.

'Roe! ' muttered Sam. 'I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! '

As these dangers became more freuent their march became slower.
Already they seemed to have been traming on, on, endlessly to the
mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort
in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's sirits had risen for a while
after his escae, and after food and a draught of the cordial; but now a
dee uneasiness, growing to dread, cret over him again. Though he had been
healed in Rivendell of the knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been
without effect. His senses were sharer and more aware of things that could
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could
see more in the dark than any of his comanions, save erhas Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung uon its chain against
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gried tighter on
the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.

The Comany behind him soke seldom, and then only in hurried whisers.
There was no sound but the sound of their own feet; the dull stum of
Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light ste of Legolas;
the soft, scarce-heard atter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow firm
footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they halted for a moment
they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and
dri of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine that he heard,
something else: like the faint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loud




enough, or near enough, for him to feel certain that he heard it; but once
it had started it never stoed, while the Comany was moving. But it was
not an echo, for when they halted it attered on for a little all by itself,
and then grew still.

It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had been
going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf came to his
first serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch oening into three
assages: all led in the same general direction, eastwards; but the
left-hand assage lunged down, while the right-hand climbed u, and the
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow.

'I have no memory of this lace at all!' said Gandalf, standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held u his staff in the hoe of finding some
marks or inscrition that might hel his choice; but nothing of the kind was
to be seen. I am too weary to decide,' he said, shaking his head. 'And I
exect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halt
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has
assed.'

'Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hoe those wolves
haven't got him yet.'

To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie
a wide chamber cut in the rock.

'Steady! Steady! ' cried Gandalf as Merry and Piin ushed forward,
glad to find a lace where they could rest with at least more feeling of
shelter than in the oen assage. 'Steady! You do not know what is inside
yet. I will go first.’

He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. 'There! ’ he said,
ointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw
a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at
the edge and trailed down into the black it. Fragments of stone lay near.

'One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you were
going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let the guide go first
while you have one.'

'This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the
three assages,' said Gimli. 'That hole was lainly a well for the guards'
use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we must all take




care in the dark.'

Piin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others were
unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far
as ossible from the hole in the floor, he cret to the edge and eered
over. A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible deths.
Moved by a sudden imulse he groed for a loose stone, and let it dro. He
felt his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then far below,
as if the stone had fallen into dee water in some cavernous lace, there
came a lunk , very distant, but magnified and reeated in the hollow shaft.

'What's that? ' cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Piin confessed
what he had done; but he was angry, and Piin could see his eye glinting.
’Fool of a Took! ' he growled. 'This is a serious ourney, not a hobbit
walking -arty. Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further
nuisance. Now be uiet! '

Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came out of
the deths faint knocks: tom-ta, ta-tom. They stoed, and when the echoes
had died away, they were reeated: ta-tom, tom-ta, ta-ta, tom. They
sounded disuietingly like signals of some sort; but after a while the
knocking died away and was not heard again.

'That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,' said
Gimli.

'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may have nothing to do
with Peregrin's foolish stone; but robably something has been disturbed
that would have been better left uiet. Pray, do nothing of the kind again!

Let us hoe we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Piin, can
go on the first watch, as a reward,' he growled, as he rolled himself in a
blanket.

Piin sat miserably by the door in the itch dark; but he ket on
turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl u out of the
well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket, but he
dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be aslee.

Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was dee
in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former ourney in the
Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he should take; a
false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he rose u and came over
to Piin.

'Get into a corner and have a slee, my lad,' he said in a kindly tone.




'You want to slee, I exect. I cannot get a wink, so I may as well do the
watching.'

'I know what is the matter with me,' he muttered, as he sat down by the
door. 'I need smoke ! I have not tasted it since the morning before the
snowstorm.'

The last thing that Piin saw, as slee took him, was a dark glimse
of the old wiard huddled on the floor, shielding a glowing chi in his
gnarled hands between his knees. The flicker for a moment showed his shar
nose, and the uff of smoke.

It was Gandalf who roused them all from slee. He had sat and watched
all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest. 'And in the
watches I have made u my mind,' he said. 'I do not like the feel of the
middle way; and I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul
air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand assage. It is
time we began to climb u again.'

For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched on;
and they met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but the faint
gleam of the wiard's light, bobbing like a will-o'-the-wis in front of
them. The assage they had chosen wound steadily uwards. As far as they
could udge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier
and wider. There were now no oenings to other galleries or tunnels on
either side, and the floor was level and sound, without its or cracks.
Evidently they had struck what once had been an imortant road; and they
went forward uicker than they had done on their first march.

In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line
east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or more. As the
road climbed uwards' Frodo's sirits rose a little; but he still felt
oressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the
Comany and beyond the fall and atter of their feet, a following footste
that was not an echo.

They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and
all were thinking of a lace where they could slee, when suddenly the walls
to right and left vanished. They seemed to have assed through some arched
doorway into a black and emty sace. There was a great draught of warmer
air behind them, and before them the darkness was cold on their faces. They
halted and crowded anxiously together.

Gandalf seemed leased. 'I chose the right way,' he said. 'At last we




are coming to the habitable arts, and I guess that we are not far now from
the eastern side. But we are high u, a good deal higher than the Dimrill
Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide
hall. I will now risk a little real light.'

He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was blae like a
flash of lightning. Great shadows srang u and fled, and for a second they
saw a vast roof far above their heads uheld by many mighty illars hewn of
stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge emty hall; its black
walls, olished and smooth as glass, flashed and glittered. Three other
entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight before them eastwards,
and one on either side. Then the light went out.

'That is all that I shall venture on for the resent,' said Gandalf.

'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out
to the light in the uer reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached them
now, but it is night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I
am right, tomorrow we may actually see the morning eeing in. But in the
meanwhile we had better go no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have
gone well so far, and the greater art of the dark road is over. But we are
not through yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that oen on the
world.'

The Comany sent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close
together in a corner to escae the draught: there seemed to be a steady
inflow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as they lay
hung the darkness, hollow and immense, and they were oressed by the
loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and endlessly branching stairs
and assages. The wildest imaginings that dark rumour had ever suggested to
the hobbits fell altogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.

'There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said
Sam; 'and every one of them busier than badgers for five hundred years to
make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for? They
didn't live in these darksome holes surely? '

'These are not holes,’ said Gimli. 'This is the great realm and city of
the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light and
slendour, as is still remembered in our songs.'

He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a dee voice,
while the echoes ran away into the roof.

The world was young, the mountains green,




No stain yet on the Moon was seen,

No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.

He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;

He stooed and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars aear,

As gems uon a silver thread,

Above the shadow of his head.

The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have assed away:
The world was fair in Durin 's Day.

A king he was on carven throne
In many-illared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver floor,

And runes of ower uon the door.

The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lams of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.

There hammer on the anvil smote,

There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, earl, and oal ale,

And metal wrought like fishes' mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining sears were laid in hoard.

Unwearied then were Durin 's folk
Beneath the mountains music woke:




The harers hared, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumets rang.



The world is grey, the mountains old,

The forge's fire is ashen-cold
No har is wrung, no hammer falls:

The darkness dwells in Durin 's halls
The shadow lies uon his tomb
In Moria, in Khaad-dym.

But still the sunken stars aear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;

There lies his crown in water dee,

Till Durin wakes again from slee.

'I like that! ' said Sam. V I should like to learn it. In Moria, in
Khaad-dym ! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all those
lams. Are there iles of ewels and gold lying about here still? '

Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.

'Piles of ewels? ' said Gandalf. 'No. The Ores have often lundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the uer halls. And since the dwarves fled,
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the dee laces: they
are drowned in water— or in a shadow of fear.'

'Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ’ asked Sam.

’For mithrif answered Gandalf. 'The wealth of Moria was not in gold
and ewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things
they found here, it is true, esecially iron; but they did not need to delve
for them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For
here alone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do
not tell. Its worth was ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond rice;
for little is left above ground, and even the Ores dare not delve here for
it. The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The
Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their
wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too
dee, and disturbed that from which they fled, Durin’s Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Ores have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute
to Sauron, who covets it.

' Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like coer, and




olished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet
harder than temered steel. Its beauty was like to that of common silver,
but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim. The Elves dearly
loved it, and among many uses they made of it ithildin , starmoon, which you
saw uon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving
Mathom-house, I suose.'

'What? ' cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. 'A corslet of
Moria- silver? That was a kingly gift! ’

'Yes,' said Gandalf. I never told him, but its worth was greater than
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.'

Frodo said nothing, but he ut his hand under his tunic and touched the
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking
about with the rice of the Shire under his acket. Had Bilbo known? He felt
no doubt that Bilbo knew uite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. But now
his thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to
Bilbo, and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo was still there. He wished
with all his heart that he was back there, and in those days, mowing the
lawn, or ottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard of Moria,
or mithril — or the Ring.

A dee silence fell. One by one the others fell aslee. Frodo was on
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors out of dee
laces, dread came over him. His hands were cold and his brow dam. He
listened. All his mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slow
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall.

His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that the
western archway stood, he fancied that he could see two ale oints of
light, almost like luminous eyes. He started. His head had nodded. 'I must
have nearly fallen aslee on guard,' he thought. 'I was on the edge of a
dream.' He stood u and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, eering into
the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas.

When he lay down he uickly went to slee, but it seemed to him that
the dream went on: he heard whisers, and saw the two ale oints of light
aroaching, slowly. He woke and found that the others were seaking softly
near him, and that a dim light was falling on his face. High u above the
eastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a long ale gleam; and
across the hall through the northern arch light also glimmered faint and




distantly.

Frodo sat u. 'Good morning! 'said Gandalf: 'For morning it is again
at last. I was right, you see. We are high u on the east side of Moria.
Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of
Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.'

'I shall be glad,' said Gimli. 'I have looked on Moria, and it is very
great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no sign of my
kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.'

After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once. 'We
are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said. 'I think
that none of us will wish to send another night in Moria.’

'No indeed! ’ said Boromir. 'Which way shall we take? Yonder eastward
arch? ’

’Maybe,’ said Gandalf. 'But I du not know yet exactly where we are.
Unless I am uite astray, I guess that we are above and to the north of the
Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The
eastern arch will robably rove to be the way that we must take; but before
we make u our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light
in the north door. If we could find a window it would hel, but I fear that
the light comes only down dee shafts.’

Following his lead the Comany assed under the northern arch. They
found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the glimmer grew
stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It was
high and flat-toed, and the stone door was still uon its hinges, standing
half oen. Beyond it was a large suare chamber. It was dimly lit, but to
their eyes, after so long a time in the dark, it seemed dalingly bright,
and they blinked as they entered.

Their feet disturbed a dee dust uon the floor, and stumbled among
things lying in the doorway whose shaes they could not at first make out.
The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further eastern wall; it
slanted uwards and, far above, a small suare atch of blue sky could be
seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a table in the middle of the
room: a single oblong block, about two feet high, uon which was laid a
great slab of white stone.

'It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
uickly to his side. On the slab runes were deely graven:




These are Daeron's Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,' said
Gandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria.'

'He is dead then,' said Frodo. T feared it was so.' Gimli cast his
hood over his face.




Chater 5 . The Bridge of Khaad-dym



The Comany of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin. Frodo
thought of Bilbo and his long friendshi with the dwarf, and of Balin's
visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the mountains it
seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world.

At length they stirred and looked u, and began to search for anything
that would give them tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of his
folk. There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber, under
the shaft. By both the doors they could now see that many bones were lying,
and among them were broken swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and
helms. Some of the swords were crooked: ore-scimitars with blackened blades.

There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them were
large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and lundered; but
beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been
slashed and stabbed and artly burned, and it was so stained with black and
other dark marks like old blood that little of it could be read. Gandalf
lifted it carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it on the
slab. He ored over it for some time without seaking. Frodo and Gimli
standing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they
were written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale,
and here and there in Elvish scrit.

At last Gandalf looked u. 'It seems to be a record of the fortunes of
Balin's folk,' he said. V I guess that it began with their coming to Dimrill
Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the ages seem to have numbers referring to
the years after their arrival. The to age is marked one — three, so at
least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!

'We drove out ores from the great gate and guard — I think; the next
word is blurred and burned; robably room — we slew many in the bright — I
think — sun in the dale. Flui was killed by an arrow. He slew the great.

Then there is a blur followed by Flui under grass near Mirror mere. The next
line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of
North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what. A shaft is mentioned.

Then Balin has set u his seat in the Chamber of Maarbul.'

'The Chamber of Records,' said Gimli. V I guess that is where we now




stand.'

'Well, I can read no more for a long way,' said Gandalf, ’excet the
word gold , and Darin 's Axe and something helm. Then Balin is now lord of
Morici. That seems to end a chater. After some stars another hand begins,
and I can see we found truesilver, and later the word wellforged and then
something, I have it! mithril; and the last two lines Uin to seek for the
uer armouries of Third Dee, something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin
gate'

Gandalf aused and set a few leaves aside. 'There are several ages of
the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged, he said; 'but I can
make little of them in this light. Now there must be a number of leaves
missing, because they begin to be numbered five, the fifth year of the
colony, I suose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot
read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a
large bold hand using an Elvish scrit.’

’That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking over the wiard's arm.

'He could write well and seedily, and often used the Elvish characters.’

'I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,' said Gandalf.

'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it
ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth of
novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in
Mirror mere, an ore shot him from behind a stone, we slew the ore, hut many
more ...u from east u the Silverlode. The remainder of the age is so
blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think I can read we have
barred the gates, and then can hold them long if, and then erhas horrible
and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have ket the title that he took for
less than five years. I wonder what haened afterwards; but there is no
time to ule out the last few ages. Here is the last age of all.' He
aused and sighed.

'It is grim reading,' he said. 'I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second
hall. Frbr and Luni and Nbli fell there. Then there are four lines smeared
so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run the ool is u
to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took Uin. We cannot get
out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the dee. I wonder what that
means. The last thing written is in a trailing scrawl of elf-letters: they
are coming. There is nothing more.' Gandalf aused and stood in silent




thought.

A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Comany. ' We
cannot get out,' muttered Gimli. 'It was well for us that the ool had sunk
a little, and that the Watcher was sleeing down at the southern end.'

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. 'They seem to have made a
last stand by both doors,' he said; 'but there were not many left by that
time. So ended the attemt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The
time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of
Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this
book, the Book of Maarbul, and look at it more closely later. You had
better kee it, Gimli, and take it back to Dbin, if you get a chance. It
will interest him, though it will grieve him deely. Come, let us go! The
morning is assing.'

'Which way shall we go? ' asked Boromir.

'Back to the hall,' answered Gandalf. 'But our visit to this room has
not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the
Chamber of Maarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end.
Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should be on the Seventh
Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!

f

Gandalf had hardly soken these words, when there came a great noise: a
rolling Boom that seemed to come from deths far below, and to tremble in
the stone at their feet. They srang towards the door in alarm. Doom, doom
it rolled again, as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria
into a vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great horn was blown
in the hall, and answering horns and harsh cries were heard further off.

There was a hurrying sound of many feet.

'They are coming! ’ cried Legolas.

'We cannot get out,' said Gimli.

'Traed! ' cried Gandalf. 'Why did I delay? Here we are, caught, ust
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what — '

Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook.

'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And kee your acks
on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.'

'No! ' said Gandalf. 'We must not get shut in. Kee the east door aar!

We will go that way, if we get a chance.'




Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming
down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Comany drew their
swords. Glamdring shone with a ale light, and Sting glinted at the edges.
Boromir set his shoulder against the western door.

'Wait a moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He srang forward
to Boromir's side and drew himself u to his full height.

'Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria? ' he
cried in a loud voice.

There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones
into a it; amid the clamour a dee voice was raised in command. Doom,
boom,

doom went the drums in the dee.

With a uick movement Gandalf steed before the narrow oening of the
door and thrust forward his staff: There was a daling flash that lit the
chamber and the assage outside. For an instant the wiard looked out.
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he srang back.

'There are Ores, very many of them,' he said. 'And some are large and
evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there
is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think, or more than one.

There is no hoe of escae that way.'

'And no hoe at all, if they come at the other door as well,' said
Boromir.

'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by
the eastern door listening. 'The assage on this side lunges straight down
a stair: it lainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it is no good
flying blindly this way with the ursuit ust behind. We cannot block the
door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it oens inwards. We must
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of
Maarbul!’ he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And®ril.

Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir flung himself against
the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken sword-blades and
slinters of wood. The Comany retreated to the other side of the chamber.
But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made it
uiver; and then it began to grind slowly oen, driving back the wedges. A
huge arm and shoulder, with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust
through the widening ga. Then a great, flat, toeless foot was forced
through below. There was a dead silence outside.




Boromir leaed forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his
sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand. The blade was
notched.

Suddenly, and to his own surrise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blae u in
his heart. 'The Shire! ' he cried, and sringing beside Boromir, he stooed,
and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot
erked back, nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo's arm. Black dros dried
from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir hurled himself against the
door and slammed it again.

'One for the Shire! ' cried Aragorn. 'The hobbit's bite is dee! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo ! '

There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams and
hammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back, and the
oening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but struck the
northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the floor. There was a horn-blast and
a rush of feet, and ores one after another leaed into the chamber.

How many there were the Comany could not count. The affray was shar,
but the ores were dismayed by the fierceness of the defence. Legolas shot
two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs from under another that had
srung u on Balin' s tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thirteen
had

fallen the rest fled shrieking, leaving the defenders unharmed, excet for
Sam who had a scratch along the scal. A uick duck had saved him; and he
had felled his ore: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A fire was
smouldering in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman ste
backwards, if he had seen it.

'Now is the time! ' cried Gandalf. 'Let us go, before the troll
returns!'

But even as they retreated, and before Piin and Merry had reached the
stair outside, a huge ore-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black mail
from head to foot, leaed into the chamber; behind him his followers
clustered in the doorway. His broad flat face was swart, his eyes were like
coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a great sear. With a thrust of
his huge hide shield he turned Boromir's sword and bore him backwards,
throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the seed of a
striking snake he charged into the Comany and thrust with his sear
straight at Frodo. The blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was




hurled against the wall and inned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the
sear- shaft, and it broke. But even as the ore flung down the truncheon and
swet out his scimitar, And®ril came down uon his helm. There was a flash
like flame and the helm burst asunder. The ore fell with cloven head. His
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn srang at them.

Doom, doom went the drums in the dee. The great voice rolled out
again.

'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! '

Aragorn icked u Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for the
stair, ushing Merry and Piin in front of him. The others followed; but
Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in site of the eril he lingered
by Balin's tomb with his head bowed. Boromir hauled the eastern door to,
grinding uon its hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, but could
not be fastened.

'I am all right,' gased Frodo. 'I can walk. Put me down! '

Aragorn nearly droed him in his amaement. 'I thought you were dead!

' he cried.

'Not yet! ' said Gandalf. 'But there is time for wonder. Off you go,
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if
I do not come soon, go on! Go uickly and choose aths leading right and
downwards.'

'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn.

'Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely. 'Swords are no more use here.

Go!'

The assage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groed their
way down a long flight of stes, and then looked back; but they could see
nothing, excet high above them the faint glimmer of the wiard's staff. He
seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed
heavily and leaned against Sam, who ut his arms about him. They stood
eering u the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the
voice of Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloing roof with
a sighing echo. He could not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be
trembling. Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom,
doom.

Suddenly at the to of the stair there was a stab of white light. Then
there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke out wildly:




doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stoed. Gandalf came flying down the
stes

and fell to the ground in the midst of the Comany.

'Well, well! That's over! ' said the wiard struggling to his feet. 'I
have done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly been
destroyed. But don't stand here! Go on! You will have to do without light
for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are you, Gimli? Come
ahead with me! Kee close behind, all of you!'

They stumbled after him wondering what had haened. Doom, doom
went

the drum-beats again: they now sounded muffled and far away, but they were
following. There was no other sound of ursuit, neither tram of feet, nor
any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the assage seemed to
be going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended
a flight of stes, fifty or more, to a lower level. At the moment that was
their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they
came on it, and ut their feet out into emtiness. Gandalf felt the ground
with his staff like a blind man.

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and
had descended many flights of stairs. There was still no sound of ursuit.
Almost they began to hoe that they would escae. At the bottom of the
seventh flight Gandalf halted.

'It is getting hot! ' he gased. 'We ought to be down at least to the
level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand turn to
take us east. I hoe it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest here a
moment, even if all the ores ever sawned are after us.'

Gimli took his arm and heled him down to a seat on the ste. 'What
haened away u there at the door? ’ he asked. 'Did you meet the beater of
the drums? ’

’I do not know,' answered Gandalf. 'But I found myself suddenly faced
by something that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but
to try and ut a shutting -sell on the door. I know many; but to do things
of that kind rightly reuires time, and even then the door can be broken by
strength.

'As I stood there I could hear ore- voices on the other side: at any
moment I thought they would burst it oen. I could not hear what was said;
they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language. All I caught was




ghvsh; that is "fire". Then something came into the chamber — I felt it
through the door, and the ores themselves were afraid and fell silent. It
laid hold of the iron ring, and then it erceived me and my sell.

’What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge.

The counter-sell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door
left my control and began to oen ! I had to seak a word of Command. That
roved too great a strain. The door burst in ieces. Something dark as a
cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down
the stairs. All the wall gave way, and the roof of the chamber as well, I
think.

'I am afraid Balin is buried dee, and maybe something else is buried
there too. I cannot say. But at least the assage behind us was comletely
blocked. Ah! I have never felt so sent, but it is assing. And now what
about you, Frodo? There was not time to say so, but I have never been more
delighted in my life than when you soke. I feared that it was a brave but
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.’

'What about me? ' said Frodo. 'I am alive, and whole I think. I am
bruised and in ain, but it is not too bad.’

'Well,' said Aragorn, 'I can only say that hobbits are made of a stuff
so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I would have
soken softer in the Inn at Bree! That sear -thrust would have skewered a
wild boar! ’

’Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; 'though I
feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He said no
more. He found breathing ainful.

’You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. 'There is more about you than
meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if the remark
meant more than it said.

They now went on again. Before long Gimli soke. He had keen eyes in
the dark. 'I think,’ he said, 'that there is a light ahead. But it is not
daylight. It is red. What can it be? ’

' Ghvsh !' muttered Gandalf. 'I wonder if that is what they meant: that
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.’

Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by all. It was
flickering and glowing on the walls away down the assage before them. They
could now see their way: in front the road sloed down swiftly, and some way
ahead there stood a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The air




became very hot.

When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to them to
wait. As he stood ust beyond the oening they saw his face lit by a red
glow. Quickly he steed back.

'There is some new devilry here,' he said, 'devised for our welcome no
doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First Dee, the
level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and
the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern end, on the left, not more than
a uarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, u a broad stair, along a wide road
through the First Hall, and out! But come and look! '

They eered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftier
and far longer than the one in which they had slet. They were near its
eastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the centre stalked a
double line of towering illars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees
whose boughs uheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems
were smooth and black, but a red glow was darkly mirrored in their sides.
Right across the floor, close to the feet of two huge illars a great
fissure had oened. Out of it a fierce red light came, and now and again
flames licked at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wiss
of dark smoke wavered in the hot air.

'If we had come by the main road down from the uer halls, we should
have been traed here,' said Gandalf. 'Let us hoe that the fire now lies
between us and ursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.'

Even as he soke they heard again the ursuing drum-beat: Doom, doom,
doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall there came
cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom : the illars seemed to tremble and the
flames to uiver.

'Now for the last race! ’ said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside
we may still escae. After me! '

He turned left and sed across the smooth floor of the hall. The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and
echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went u: they had been
seen. There was a ring and clash of steel. An arrow whistled over Frodo's
head.

Boromir laughed. 'They did not exect this,’ he said. 'The fire has cut
them off. We are on the wrong side! ’

'Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. 'The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and




narrow.’

Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the
floor vanished and fell to an unknown deth. The outer door could only be
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that sanned the
chasm with one curving sring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of
the Dwarves against any enemy that might cature the First Hall and the
outer assages. They could only ass across it in single file. At the brink
Gandalf halted and the others came u in a ack behind.

'Lead the way, Gimli! ' he said. 'Piin and Merry next. Straight on
and u the stair beyond the door! '

Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and srang back. Another
ierced Gandalf s hat and stuck there like a black feather. Frodo looked
behind. Beyond the fire he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to be
hundreds of ores. They brandished sears and scimitars which shone red as
blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and
louder, doom, doom.

Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slied to
the ground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great trolls aeared;
they bore great slabs of stone, and flung them down to serve as gangways
over the fire. But it was not the trolls that had filled the Elf with
terror. The ranks of the ores had oened, and they crowded away, as if they
themselves were afraid. Something was coming u behind them. What it was
could not be seen: it was like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a
dark form, of man-shae maybe, yet greater; and a ower and terror seemed to
be in it and to go before it.

It came to the edge of the fire and the light faded as if a cloud had
bent over it. Then with a rush it leaed across the fissure. The flames
roared u to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in
the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blaed behind it. In its right hand
was a blade like a stabbing tongue of fire; in its left it held a whi of
many thongs.

'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! '

Gimli stared with wide eyes. 'Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his
axe fall he covered his face.

'A Balrog,' muttered Gandalf. 'Now I understand.' He faltered and
leaned heavily on his staff. 'What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.'




The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The ores yelled
and oured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his horn and blew.
Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many throats under
the cavernous roof. For a moment the ores uailed and the fiery shadow
halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a flame blown out by a dark
wind, and the enemy advanced again.

'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. "Fly ! This is
a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly! ' Aragorn and
Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side,
behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted ust within
the doorway at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their leader to
face the enemy alone.

The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the san,
leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand Glamdring
gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow
about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whi, and the thongs
whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm.

'You cannot ass,' he said. The ores stood still, and a dead silence
fell. V I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You
cannot ass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udyn. Go back to the
Shadow! You cannot ass.'

The Balrog made no answer. The fire in it seemed to die, but the
darkness grew. It steed forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it
drew itself u to a great height, and its wings were sread from wall to
wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed
small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a wiened tree before the
onset of a storm.

From out of the shadow a red sword leaed flaming.

Glamdring glittered white in answer.

There was a ringing clash and a stab of white fire. The Balrog fell
back and its sword flew u in molten fragments. The wiard swayed on the
bridge, steed back a ace, and then again stood still.

'You cannot ass! ' he said.

With a bound the Balrog leaed full uon the bridge. Its whi whirled
and hissed.

'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the
bridge. 'Elendil!' he shouted. 'I am with you, Gandalf! '




'Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaed after him.

At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the
bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his hand. A
blinding sheet of white flame srang u. The bridge cracked. Right at the
Balrog's feet it broke, and the stone uon which it stood crashed into the
gulf, while the rest remained, oised, uivering like a tongue of rock
thrust out into emtiness.

With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow lunged
down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whi, and the thongs
lashed and curled about the wiard’s knees, dragging him to the brink. He
staggered and fell, grased vainly at the stone, and slid into the abyss.

’Fly, you fools! ' he cried, and was gone.

The fires went out, and blank darkness fell. The Comany stood rooted
with horror staring into the it. Even as Aragorn and Boromir came flying
back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry Aragorn roused
them.

’Come! I will lead you now ! ' he called. 'We must obey his last
command. Follow me! '

They stumbled wildly u the great stairs beyond the door. Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the to was a wide echoing assage. Along
this they fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeing, and then he found that
he himself was weeing as he ran. Doom, doom, doom the drum-beats rolled
behind, mournful now and slow; doom!

They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts ierced the roof.

They ran swifter. They assed into a hall, bright with daylight from its
high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors
they assed, and suddenly before them the Great Gates oened, an arch of
blaing light.

There was a guard of ores crouching in the shadows behind the great
door osts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and cast
down. Aragorn smote to the ground the catain that stood in his ath, and
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Comany swet ast them and took
no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and srang down the huge and
age-worn stes, the threshold of Moria.

Thus, at last, they came beyond hoe under the sky and felt the wind on
their faces.

They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls.




Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay uon it,
but eastwards there was a golden light on the land. It was but one hour
after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high.

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under the
mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum-beats:
doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the dale
all around was emty. Doom. Grief at last wholly overcame them, and they
wet long: some standing and silent, some cast uon the ground. Doom, doom.
The drum-beats faded.




Chater 6 . Lothlurien



'Alas! I Fear we cannot stay here longer,' said Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held u his sword. 'Farewell, Gandalf ! ' he cried.
'Did I not say to you: if you ass the doors of Moria, bewarel Alas that I
soke true! What hoe have we without you? '

He turned to the Comany. 'We must do without hoe,' he said. 'At least
we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and wee no more! Come! We
have

a long road, and much to do.'

They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran u into a glen
of shadows between two great arms of the mountains, above which three white
eaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria.
At the head of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over an endless
ladder of short falls, and a mist of foam hung in the air about the
mountains' feet.

'Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,' said Aragorn, ointing to the falls.

'Down the dee-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should have
come, if fortune had been kinder.'

'Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. 'There he stands smiling in the
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-caed eaks and turned
away.

To the east the outflung arm of the mountains marched to a sudden end,
and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and vague. To the south
the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than
a mile away, and a little below them, for they still stood high u on the
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaed like a
great sear-head thrust dee into the northern glen; but its southern end
was beyond the shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a
dee blue like clear evening sky seen from a lam-lit room. Its face was
still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides
to its bare unbroken rim.

'There lies the Mirrormere, dee Kheled-vram! ' said Gimli sadly. 'I
remember that he said: "May you have oy of the sight! But we cannot linger
there." Now long shall I ourney ere I have oy again. It is I that must




hasten away, and he that must remain.'

The Comany now went down the road from the Gates. It was rough and
broken, fading to a winding track between heather and whin that thrust amid
the cracking stones. But still it could be seen that once long ago a great
aved way had wound uwards from the lowlands of the Dwarf-kingdom.

In

laces there were ruined works of stone beside the ath, and mounds of green
toed with slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward
bend led them hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the
roadside stood a single column broken at the to.

'That is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. 'I cannot ass without turning
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale ! '

'Be swift then! ' said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates. 'The
Sun sinks early. The Ores will not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we
must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost sent, and it will be
dark tonight.'

'Come with me, Frodo! ' cried the dwarf, sringing from the road. 'I
would not have you go without seeing Kheled-vram.' He ran down the long
green sloe. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue water in site
of hurt and weariness; Sam came u behind.

Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked u. It was cracked
and weather-worn, and the faint runes uon its side could not be read. 'This
illar marks the sot where Durin first looked in the Mirrormere,' said the
dwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!'

They stooed over the dark water. At first they could see nothing. Then
slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a rofound
blue, and the eaks were like lumes of white flame above them; beyond there
was a sace of sky. There like ewels sunk in the dee shone glinting stars,
though sunlight was in the sky above. Of their own stooing forms no shadow
could be seen.

'O Kheled-vram fair and wonderful! ' said Gimli. 'There lies the Crown
of Durin till he wakes. Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastened
back u the green-sward to the road again.

'What did you see? ' said Piin to Sam, but Sam was too dee in
thought to answer.

The road now turned south and went uickly downwards, running out from
between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere they came on a dee




well of water, clear as crystal, from which a freshet fell over a stone li
and ran glistening and gurgling down a stee rocky channel.

'Here is the sring from which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. 'Do
not drink of it! It is icy cold.'

'Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other
mountain- streams,' said Aragorn. 'Our road leads beside it for many miles.
For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and first I hoe to
come to the woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River-out
yonder.' They looked as he ointed, and before them they could see the
stream leaing down to the trough of the valley, and then running on and
away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden hae.

'There lie the woods of Lothlurien! ’ said Legolas. 'That is the
fairest of all the dwellings of my eole. There are no trees like the trees
of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not
till the sring comes and the new green oens do they fall, and then the
boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden,
and golden is the roof, and its illars are of silver, for the bark of the
trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would
be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were sringtime ! ’

'My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn. 'But it lies
many miles away. Let us hasten! '

For some time Frodo and Sam managed to kee u with the others; but
Aragorn was leading them at a great ace, and after a while they lagged
behind. They had eaten nothing since the early morning. Sam's cut was
burning like fire, and his head felt light. In site of the shining sun the
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt
every ste more ainful and he gased for breath.

At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he soke to
Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come
with him.

'I am sorry, Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. 'So much has haened
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were
hurt; and Sam too. You should have soken. We have done nothing to ease
you,

as we ought, though all the ores of Moria were after us. Come now! A little
further on there is a lace where we can rest for a little. There I will do
what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.'




Soon afterwards they came uon another stream that ran down from the
west, and oined its bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Together
they lunged over a fall of green-hued stone, and foamed down into a dell.
About it stood fir-trees, short and bent, and its sides were stee and
clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of whortle -berry. At the bottom there
was a level sace through which the stream flowed noisily over shining
ebbles. Here they rested. It was now nearly three hours after noon, and
they had come only a few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was
westering.

While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and
fir-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was
not

dee, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn’s face was grave as he examined it.
After a moment he looked u with relief.

’Good luck, Sam! ’ he said. 'Many have received worse than this in
ayment for the slaying of their first ore. The cut is not oisoned, as the
wounds of ore-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended
it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.'

He oened his ouch and drew out some withered leaves. 'They are dry
and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the
leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weatherto. Crush one in the water,
and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! '

'I am all right,' said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.

'All I needed was some food and a little rest.'

'No! ' said Aragorn. 'We must have a look and see what the hammer and
the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at all.’

Gently he stried off Frodo's old acket and worn tunic, and gave a gas of
wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like
the light uon a riling sea. Carefully he took it off and held it u, and
the gems on it glittered like stars, and the sound of the shaken rings was
like the tinkle of rain in a ool.

'Look, my friends!’ he called. 'Here's a retty hobbit-skin to wra an
el ven -rinceling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides, all the
hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.'

'And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,'
said Gimli, gaing at the mail in wonder. 'It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I
have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf




soke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! '

'I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in his
little room,' said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever.

I hoe we get a chance of telling him about it! '

There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast.
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one oint the rings
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored
and bruised where he had been hurled against the wall. While the others set
the food ready. Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was
steeed. The ungent fragrance filled the dell, and all those who stooed
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the
ain leave him, and his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft ads of cloth at his side.

'The mail is marvellously light,' he said. 'Put it on again, if you can
bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do not lay it
aside, even in slee, unless fortune brings you where you are safe for a
while; and that will seldom chance while your uest lasts.’

When they had eaten, the Comany got ready to go on. They ut out the
fire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they took to
the road again. They had not gone far before the sun sank behind the
westward heights and great shadows cret down the mountain-sides. Dusk
veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the
evening light lay ale uon the dim lands of distant lain and wood. Sam and
Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair
ace, and with only one brief halt Aragorn led the Comany on for nearly
three more hours.

It was dark. Dee night had fallen. There were many clear stars, hut
the fast- waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and Frodo were at
the rear, walking softly and not seaking, listening for any sound uon the
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.

'Not a sound but the wind,' he said. 'There are no goblins near, or my
ears are made of wood. It is to be hoed that the Ores will be content with
driving us from Moria. And maybe that was all their urose, and they had
nothing else to do with us-with the Ring. Though Ores will often ursue foes
for many leagues into the lain, if they have a fallen catain to avenge.’

Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade was dull. Yet
he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallen




about them and the road behind was dim, he had heard again the uick atter
of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams
of light behind, or for a moment he thought he saw them, but at once they
slied aside and vanished.

'What is it? ' said the dwarf.

'I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet, and I thought
I saw a light-like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered
Moria.'

Gimli halted and stooed to the ground. 'I hear nothing but the
night-seech of lant and stone,' he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others
are out of sight.'

The night-wind blew chill u the valley to meet them. Before them a
wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of leaves like
olars in the breee.

'Lothlurien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothlurien! We have come to the eaves of
the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! '

Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road
and stream that ran suddenly beneath their sreading boughs. In the dim
light of the stars their stems were grey, and their uivering leaves a hint
of fallow gold.

'Lothlurien! ' said Aragorn. 'Glad I am to hear again the wind in the
trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can
go no further. Here let us hoe that the virtue of the Elves will kee us
tonight from the eril that comes behind.'

'If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli.

'It is long since any of my own folk ourneyed hither back to the land
whence we wandered in ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that Lurien
is not yet deserted, for there is a secret ower here that holds evil from
the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now
dee in the woods and far from the northern border.'

'Indeed dee in the wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as if
some memory stirred in him. 'We must fend for ourselves tonight. We will go
forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn
aside from the ath and seek a lace to rest in.'

He steed forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not follow.

'Is there no other way? ' he said.

'What other fairer way would you desire? ’ said Aragorn.




'A lain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir.

'By strange aths has this Comany been led, and so far to evil fortune.
Against my will we assed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we
must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that erilous land we have heard
in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few
none have escaed unscathed.'

'Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will seak
the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of
those who once were wise they now seak evil of Lothlurien. Believe what you
will, there is no other way for us — unless you would go back to
Moria-gate, or scale the athless mountains, or swim the Great River all
alone.’

'Then lead on! ' said Boromir. 'But it is erilous.’

'Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and erilous; but only evil need
fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me! '

They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they came
uon another stream flowing down swiftly from the tree-clad sloes that
climbed back westward towards the mountains. They heard it slashing over a
fall away among the shadows on their right. Its dark hurrying waters ran
across the ath before them, and oined the Silverlode in a swirl of dim
ools among the roots of trees.

'Here is Nimrodel! ' said Legolas. 'Of this stream the Silvan Elves
made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North, remembering
the rainbow on its falls, and the golden flowers that floated in its foam.

All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my
feet, for it is said that the water is healing to the weary.' He went
forward and climbed down the dee-cloven bank and steed into the stream.

'Follow me!’ he cried. 'The water is not dee. Let us wade across! On
the further bank we can rest, and the sound of the falling water may bring
us slee and forgetfulness of grief.'

One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a moment Frodo
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold
but its touch was clean, and as he went on and it mounted to his knees, he
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.

When all the Comany had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little
food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood
still ket in their hearts, of sunlight and starlight uon the meadows by




the Great River before the world was grey.

At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall
running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could hear a
voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.

'Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? ' asked Legolas. 'I will sing you a
song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the stream beside
which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this
is how it runs in the Westron Seech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.' In
a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them he
began:

An Elven-maid there was of old,

A shining star by day:

Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,

Her shoes of silver-grey.

A star was bound uon her brows,

A light was on her hair
As sun uon the golden boughs
In Lurien the fair.

Her hair was long, her limbs were white,

And fair she was and free;

And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.

Beside the falls of Nimrodel,

By water clear and cool,

Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining ool.

Where now she wanders none can tell,

In sunlight or in shade;

For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.

The elven-shi in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee




Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.

A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,

And drove the shi from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.

When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their lumes of blinding sray.

Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,

And cursed the faithless shi that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.

Of old he was an Elven-king,

A lord of tree and glen,

When golden were the boughs in sring
In fair Lothlurien.

From helm to sea they saw him lea,

As arrow from the string,

And dive into the water dee,

As mew uon the wing.

The wind was in his flowing hair,

The foam about him shone;

Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.

But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.




The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. 'I cannot sing any
more,' he said. 'That is but a art, for I have forgotten much. It is long
and sad, for it tells how sorrow came uon Lothlurien, Lurien of the
Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.'

'But the Dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli.

'I said not so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly. 'Then many of
the Elves of Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and dearted and she
was lost far in the South, in the asses of the White Mountains; and she
came not to the shi where Amroth her lover waited for her. But in the
sring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the
voice of Amroth comes u from the sea; for Nimrodel flows into Silverlode,
that Elves call Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin
flows into the Bay of B elf alas whence the Elves of Lurien set sail. But
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever came back.

'It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that
grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lurien, to
dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were called the
Galadhrim, the Tree -eole. Dee in their forest the trees are very great.

The eole of the woods did not delve in the ground like Dwarves, nor build
strong laces of stone before the Shadow came.'

'And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be thought
safer than sitting on the ground,' said Gimli. He looked across the stream
to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then u into the roof of dark
boughs above.

'Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn. 'We cannot build
a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the
tree-tos, if we can. We have sat here beside the road already longer than
was wise.’

The Comany now turned aside from the ath, and went into the shadow of
the deeer woods, westward along the mountain-stream away from
Silverlode.

Not far from the falls of Nimrodel they found a cluster of trees, some of
which overhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty girth, but
their height could not be guessed.

'I will climb u,’ said Legolas. 'I am at home among trees, by root or
bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in




song. Mellyrn they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom,
but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is their shae and way
of growth.'

'Whatever it may be,' said Piin, 'they will be marvellous trees
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, excet to birds. I cannot slee
on a erch ! ’

'Then dig a hole in the ground,' said Legolas, 'if that is more after
the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and dee, if you wish to
hide from Ores.’ He srang lightly u from the ground and caught a branch
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for
a moment, a voice soke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him.

' Daro !' it said in commanding tone, and Legolas droed back to earth
in surrise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.

'Stand still! ' he whisered to the others. 'Do not move or seak! ’

There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then another
clear voice soke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what
was said, for the seech that the Silvan folk east of the mountains used
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked u and
answered

in the same language.*

'Who are they, and what do they say? ’ asked Merry.

'They're Elves,' said Sam. 'Can't you hear their voices? '

'Yes, they are Elves,' said Legolas; 'and they say that you breathe so
loud that they could shoot you in the dark.' Sam hastily ut his hand over
his mouth. 'But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been
aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and
knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not
hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me
climb u with Frodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of
our ourney. The others they ask to wait a little and to kee watch at the
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.'

Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of roe,
silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender it
roved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly u, and Frodo
followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches
of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swet
uward; but near the to the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs,




and among these they found that there had been built a wooden latform, or
flet as such things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan.

It was reached by a round hole in the centre through which the ladder
assed.

When Frodo came at last u on to the flet he found Legolas seated with
three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could not be seen
among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood u, and one of
them uncovered a small lam that gave out a slender silver beam. He held it
u, looking at Frodo's face, and Sam's. Then he shut off the light again,
and soke words of welcome in his elven-tongue. Frodo soke haltingly in
return.

'Welcome!' the Elf then said again in the Common Fanguage, seaking
slowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart
of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings with any other folk. Even
our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there are some of us
still who go abroad for the gathering of news and the watching of our
enemies, and they seak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my
name. My brothers, R®mil and Orohin, seak little of your tongue.

'But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrond
assed by Furien on their way home u the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of
hobbits, or halflings, for many a long year, and did not know that any yet
dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not look evil! And since you come with an Elf
of our kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as Elrond asked; though it
is not our custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here
tonight. How many are you? ’

'Eight,' said Legolas. 'Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom,
Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.'

'The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lurien,' said Haldir,
'and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you have yet
soken only of seven.'

'The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas.

'A dwarf! ’ said Haldir. 'That is not well. We have not had dealings
with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not ermitted in our land. I
cannot allow him to ass.'

'But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dbin's trusty eole, and
friendly to Elrond,' said Frodo. 'Elrond himself chose him to be one of our
comanions, and he has been brave and faithful.'




The Elves soke together in soft voices, and uestioned Legolas in
their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. 'We will do this, though
it is against our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer
for him, he shall ass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlurien.

'But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain on the
ground. We have been keeing watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a great
troo of Ores going north toward Moria, along the skirts of the mountains,
many days ago. Wolves are howling on the wood's borders. If you have indeed
come from Moria, the eril cannot be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go
on.

'The four hobbits shall climb u here and stay with us- we do not fear
them! There is another ta Ian in the next tree. There the others must take
refuge. You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call us, if anything is
amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!'

Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon
afterwards Merry and Piin clambered u on to the high flet. They were out
of breath and seemed rather scared.

'There!' said Merry anting. 'We have lugged u your blankets as well
as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of the baggage in a dee drift
of leaves.’

'You had no need of your burdens,' said Haldir. 'It is cold in the
tree-tos in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we have
food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill, and we have
skins and cloaks to sare.’

The hobbits acceted this second (and far better) suer very gladly.

Then they wraed themselves warmly, not only in the fur-cloaks of the
Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to go to slee. But
weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like
heights, and do not slee ustairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet
was not at all to their liking as a bedroom. It had no walls, not even a
rail; only on one side was there a light laited screen, which could be
moved and fixed in different laces according to the wind.

Piin went on talking for a while. 'I hoe, if I do go to slee in
this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said.

'Once I do get to slee,’ said Sam, ’i shall go on sleeing, whether I
roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I'll dro off, if you take my
meaning.'




Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked u at the stars glinting
through the ale roof of uivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side long
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey forms of two
elves sitting motionless with their arms about their knees, seaking in
whisers. The other had gone down to take u his watch on one of the lower
branches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and the sweet
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell aslee with the song of
Legolas running in his mind.

Late in the night he awoke. The other hobbits were aslee. The Elves
were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves. The wind
was

still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on
the ground below. There was a ring of metal. The sounds died slowly away,
and seemed to go southward, on into the wood.

A head aeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat u in
alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits.

'What is it? ' said Frodo.

' Yrch !' said the Elf in a hissing whiser, and cast on to the flet the
roe-ladder rolled u.

'Ores! ' said Frodo. 'What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone.

There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the very
falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shivered in his wras. He was
thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but he felt that the
trees offered little rotection, excet concealment. Ores were as keen as
hounds on a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew out
Sting: it flashed and glittered like a blue flame and then slowly faded
again and grew dull. In site of the fading of his sword the feeling of
immediate danger did not leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got u and
crawled to the oening and eered down. He was almost certain that he could
hear stealthy movements at the tree’s foot far below.

Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in their
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemed
to be scrabbling on the bark of the tree-trunk. He stared down into the
dark, holding his breath.

Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a soft
hissing through closed teeth. Then coming u, close to the stem, Frodo saw




two ale eyes. They stoed and gaed uward unwinking. Suddenly they
turned

away, and a shadowy figure slied round the trunk of the tree and vanished.

Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly u through the
branches. 'There was something in this tree that I have never seen before,'
he said. 'It was not an ore. It fled as soon as I touched the tree -stem. It
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I might have thought
that it was one of you hobbits.

I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot risk
battle. A strong comany of Ores has assed. They crossed the Nimrodel-curse
their foul feet in its clean water! -and went on down the old road beside the
river. They seemed to ick u some scent, and they searched the ground for a
while near the lace where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a
hundred, so we went ahead and soke with feigned voices, leading them on
into the wood.

'Orohin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn our
eole. None of the Ores will ever return out of Lurien. And there will be
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. But you
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.’

Day came ale from the East. As the light grew it filtered through the
yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that the early
sun of a cool summer's morning was shining. Pale-blue sky eeed among the
moving branches. Looking through an oening on the south side of the flet
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of fallow gold
tossing gently in the breee.

The morning was still young and cold when the Comany set out again,
guided now by Haldir and his brother R®mil. 'Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! '
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of white foam among
the

grey tree-stems. 'Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him that he would never
hear again a running water so beautiful, for ever blending its innumerable
notes in an endless changeful music.

They went back to the ath that still went on along the west side of
the Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the
rints of ore-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.

'There is one of my eole yonder across the stream,' he said 'though




you may not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out
of a thicket of young trees an Elf steed, clad in grey, but with his hood
thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully
cast over the stream a coil of grey roe, and he caught it and bound the end
about a tree near the bank.

'Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,' said Haldir
'and it runs both swift and dee, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it
so far north, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness we do not
make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He made his end of the roe
fast about another tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river and
back again, as if he were on a road.

V I can walk this ath,' said Legolas; 'but the others have not this
skill. Must they swim?’

'No!' said Haldir. 'We have two more roes. We will fasten them above
the other, one shoulder-high, and another half-high, and holding these the
strangers should be able to cross with care.'

When this slender bridge had been made, the Comany assed over, some
cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of the hobbits Piin roved the
best for he was sure-footed, and he walked over uickly, holding only with
one hand; but he ket his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam
shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the ale eddying water
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.

He breathed with relief when he was safely across. 'Live and learn! as
my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening, not of roosting
like a bird, nor of trying to walk like a sider. Not even my uncle Andy
ever did a trick like that! ’

When at length all the Comany was gathered on the east bank of the
Silverlode, the Elves untied the roes and coiled two of them. R®mil, who
had remained on the other side, drew back the last one, slung it on his
shoulder, and with a wave of his hand went away, back to Nimrodel to kee
watch.

'Now, friends,' said Haldir, 'you have entered the Naith of Lurien or
the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a sear -head
between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We allow no strangers
to sy out the secrets of the Naith. Few indeed are ermitted even to set
foot there.

'As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. The




other may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, down
in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.'

This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. 'The agreement was made
without my consent,' he said. 'I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a
risoner. And I am no sy. My folk have never had dealings with any of the
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we done harm to the Elves. I am no more
likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my comanions.’

’I do not doubt you,’ said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am not the
master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in letting you
set foot over Celebrant.'

Gimli was obstinate. He lanted his feet firmly aart, and laid his
hand uon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will
go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of word, though I
erish alone in the wilderness.'

'You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far,
you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall udge you, to
hold you or to give you leave, as they will. You cannot cross the rivers
again, and behind you there are now secret sentinels that you cannot ass.

You would be slain before you saw them.'

Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his comanion bent their
bows. 'A lague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.

'Come!' said Aragorn. 'If I am still to lead this Comany, you must do
as I bid. It is hard uon the Dwarf to be thus singled out. We will all be
blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make the ourney
slow and dull.'

Gimli laughed suddenly. 'A merry troo of fools we shall look! Will
Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one dog? But I
will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.’

'I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming angry in his
turn.

'Now let us cry: "a lague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn.

'But the Comany shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! '

'I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do
not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.

'You will have no claim,' said Haldir. 'I shall lead you well, and the
aths are smooth and straight.’

'Alas for the folly of these days! ’ said Legolas. 'Here all are




enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry
in the woodland under leaves of gold! '

'Folly it may seem,' said Haldir. ’Indeed in nothing is the ower of
the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangement that divides all
those who still oose him. Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in
the world beyond Lothlurien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by
our own trust endanger our land. We live now uon an island amid many
erils, and our hands are more often uon the bowstring than uon the har.

'The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the
Shadow has cret northward all about us. Some seak of dearting, yet for
that it already seems too late. The mountains to the west are growing evil;
to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron’s creatures; and it is
rumoured that we cannot now safely ass southward through Rohan, and the
mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come
to

the shores of the Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there. It is
said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are far north
and west, beyond the land of the Halflings. But where that may be, though
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’

'You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said Merry.

'There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.’

'Hay folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea! ’ said
Haldir. ’It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still
we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.’

'I cannot,’ said Merry. 'I have never seen them. I have never been out
of my own land before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. I
don’t think I should have had the heart to leave it.’

'Not even to see fair Lothlurien? ’ said Haldir. ’The world is indeed
full of eril, and in it there are many dark laces; but still there is much
that is fair, and though in all lands love is now mingled with grief, it
grows erhas the greater.

'Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw back and
eace shall come again. Yet I do not believe that the world about us will
ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime.

For the Elves, I fear, it will rove at best a truce, in which they may ass
to the Sea unhindered and leave the Middle-earth for ever. Alas for
Lothlurien that I love! It would be a oor life in a land where no mallorn




grew. But if there are mallorn-trees beyond the Great Sea, none have
reorted it.'

As they soke thus, the Comany filed slowly along the aths in the
wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground
beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while they walked more
freely, without fear of hurt or fall. Being derived of sight, Frodo found
his hearing and other senses sharened. He could smell the trees and the
trodden grass. He could hear many different notes in the rustle of the
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear
voices of birds in the sky. He felt the sun uon his face and hands when
they assed through an oen glade.

As soon as he set foot uon the far bank of Silverlode a strange
feeling had come uon him, and it deeened as he walked on into the Naith:
it seemed to him that he had steed over a bridge of time into a corner of
the Elder Days, and was -now walking in a world that was no more. In
Rivendell there was memory of ancient things; in Lurien the ancient things
still lived on in the waking world. Evil had been seen and heard there,
sorrow had been known; the Elves feared and distrusted the world outside:
wolves were howling on the wood's borders: but on the land of Lurien no
shadow lay.

All that day the Comany marched on, until they felt the cool evening
come and heard the early night- wind whisering among many leaves. Then
they

rested and slet without fear uon the ground; for their guides would not
ermit them to unbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morning
they went on again, walking without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo
was aware that they had assed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard
the sound of many voices all around him.

A marching host of Elves had come u silently: they were hastening
toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they
brought news, some of which Haldir reorted. The marauding ores had been
waylaid and almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the
mountains, and were being ursued. A strange creature also had been seen,
running with bent back and with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet
notofbeast-shae.lt had eluded cature, and they had not shot it, not
knowing whether it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode
southward.




'Also,' said Haldir, "they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of
the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems that
the Lady knows who and what is each member of your Comany. New
messages

have come from Rivendell erhas.'

He removed the bandage first from Gimli' s eyes. 'Your ardon! ' he
said, bowing low. "Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for
you are the first dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith of Lurien since
Durin's Day! '

When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked u and caught his
breath. They were standing in an oen sace. To the left stood a great
mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as Sring-time in the Elder
Days. Uon it, as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer had
bark of snowy white, and were leafless but beautiful in their shaely
nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees of great height, still arrayed in
ale gold. High amid the branches of a towering tree that stood in the
centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of the trees, and all
about the green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers
shaed like stars. Among them, nodding on slender stalks, were other
flowers, white and alest green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue
of the grass. Over all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed
uon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.

'Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,' said Haldir. "For this is the
heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the mound of
Amroth, where in haier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom the
winter flowers in the unfading grass: the yellow elanor, and the ale
nihredil. Here we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrim
at dusk.'

The others cast themselves down uon the fragrant grass, but Frodo
stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had steed
through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A light was uon it
for which his language had no name. All that he saw was shaely, but the
shaes seemed at once clear cut, as if they had been first conceived and
drawn at the uncovering of his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for
ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green,
but they were fresh and oignant, as if he had at that moment first




erceived them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter here
no

heart could mourn for summer or for sring. No blemish or sickness or
deformity could be seen in anything that grew uon the earth. On the land of
Lurien there was no stain.

He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round
with a uled exression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not sure that
he was awake. 'It's sunlight and bright day, right enough,' he said. 'I
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song, if you take
my meaning.'

Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both
thought and word. He smiled. 'You feel the ower of the Lady of the
Galadhrim,' he said. 'Would it lease you to climb with me u Cerin Amroth?

f

They followed him as he steed lightly u the grass-clad sloes.
Though he walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that he was in
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When
he had gone and assed again into the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer
from the Shire would walk there, uon the grass among elanor and nihredil
in fair Lothlurien.

They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South Wind
blew uon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches. Frodo stood still,
hearing far off_ great seas uon beaches that had long ago been washed away,
and sea-birds crying whose race had erished from the earth.

Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet. As Frodo
reared to follow him, he laid his hand uon the tree beside the ladder:
never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware of the feel and
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within it. He felt a delight in
wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as carenter; it was the
delight of the living tree itself.

As he steed out at last uon the lofty latform, Haldir took his hand
and turned him toward the South. 'Look this way first! ’ he said.

Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it,
it seemed to him that the ower and light came that held all the land in




sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the green city. Then
he looked eastward and saw all the land of Lurien running down to the ale
gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted his eyes across the river and
all the light went out, and he was back again in the world he knew. Beyond
the river the land aeared flat and emty, formless and vague, until far
away it rose again like a wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on
Lothlurien had no ower to enlighten the shadow of that distant height.

'There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,' said Haldir. 'It is
clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and
their branches rot and wither. In the midst uon a stony height stands Dol
Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is
inhabited again, and with ower sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it
of late. In this high lace you may see the two owers that are oosed one
to another; and ever they strive now in thought, but whereas the light
erceives the very heart of the darkness, its own secret has not been
discovered. Not yet.' He turned and climbed swiftly down, and they followed
him.

At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as a
tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in
his eyes. He was wraed in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked at him he
knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same lace. For the
grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in
white, a young lord tall and fair; and he soke words in the Elvish tongue
to one whom Frodo could not see. Arwen vanimelda, nambril! he said, and then
he drew a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and
smiled.

'Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, 'and here my heart
dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that we still
must tread, you and I. Come with me! ' And taking Frodo's hand in his, he
left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man.




Chater 7 . The Mirror of Galadriel



The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows were
deeening in the woods, when they went on again. Their aths now went into
thickets where the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees
as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lams.

Suddenly they came out into the oen again and found themselves under a
ale evening sky ricked by a few early stars. There was a wide treeless
sace before them, running in a great circle and bending away on either
hand. Beyond it was a dee fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass uon its
brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone.
Uon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in
all the land. Their height could not be guessed, but they stood u in the
twilight like living towers. In their, many -tiered branches and amid their
ever-moving leaves countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and
silver. Haldir turned towards the Comany.

'Welcome to Caras Galadhon! ' he said. 'Here is the city of the
Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady of Lurien.
But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go
round to the southern side, and the way is not short, for the city is
great.'

There was a road aved with white stone running on the outer brink of
the fosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever climbing u
like a green cloud uon their left; and as the night deeened more lights
srang forth, until all the hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last
to a white bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they
faced south-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall that here
overlaed, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lams.

Haldir knocked and soke, and the gates oened soundlessly; but of
guards Lrodo could see no sign. The travellers assed within, and the gates
shut behind them. They were in a dee lane between the ends of the wall, and
assing uickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could
they see, nor hear any feet uon the aths; but there were many voices,
about them, and in the air above. Ear away u on the hill they could hear




the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain uon leaves.

They went along many aths and climbed many stairs, until they came to
the high laces and saw before them amid a wide lawn a fountain shimmering.
It was lit by silver lams that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell
into a basin of silver, from which a white stream silled. Uon the south
side of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; its great
smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and u it towered, until its first
branches, far above, oened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves.
Beside it a broad white ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were
seated. They srang u as the travellers aroached, and Frodo saw that they
were tall and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white
cloaks.

'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,' said Haldir. v It is their wish
that you should ascend and seak with them.'

One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and it
was answered three times from far above. V I will go first,' said Haldir.

'Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they
wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs,
but you may rest uon the way.'

As he climbed slowly u Frodo assed many flets: some on one side, some
on another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so that the ladder
assed through them. At a great height above the ground he came to a wide
talan, like the deck of a great shi. On it was built a house, so large that
almost it would have served for a hall of Men uon the earth. He entered
behind Haldir, and found that he was in a chamber of oval shae, in the
midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now taering towards its
crown, and yet making still a illar of wide girth.

The chamber was filled with a soft light; its walls were green and
silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two chairs
beneath the bole of the tree and canoied by a living bough there sat, side
by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood u to greet their guests, after
the manner of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall
they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave and
beautiful. They were clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of
dee gold, and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright;
but no sign of age was uon them, unless it were in the deths of their
eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet rofound, the




wells of dee memory.

Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his own
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long uon his face.

'Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! ' said Celeborn. 'When
all have come we will seak together.'

Each of the comanions he greeted courteously by name as they entered.
'Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn! ’ he said. 'It is eight and thirty years
of the world outside since you came to this land; and those years lie heavy
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for
a while ! '

'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred ourney hither from
the North.'

'Welcome Gimli son of Gluin! It is long indeed since we saw one of
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our long law. May
it be a sign that though the world is now dark better days are at hand, and
that friendshi shall be renewed between our eoles.' Gimli bowed low.

When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked at
them again. 'Here there are eight,' he said. 'Nine were to set out: so said
the messages. But maybe there has been some change of counsel that we have
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this
year the shadows have grown longer.’

'Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel seaking
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeer than woman's
wont. 'Gandalf the Grey set out with the Comany, but he did not ass the
borders of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to seak
with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless he comes within the
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and
of his mind are hidden from me.’

'Alas! ' said Aragorn. 'Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He remained
in Moria and did not escae.'

At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and
amaement. 'These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, 'the most evil that have
been soken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir.
'Why has nothing of this been told to me before? ' he asked in the
Elven-tongue.

'We have not soken to Haldir of our deeds or our urose,' said
Legolas. 'At first we were weary and danger was too close behind and




afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness
on the fair aths of Lurien.'

'Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,' said Frodo.
’Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escae
seemed beyond hoe he saved us, and he fell.’

Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn:

Then Aragorn recounted all that had haened uon the ass of
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he soke of Balin and his
book, and the fight in the Chamber of Maarbul, and the fire, and the narrow
bridge, and the coming of the Terror. 'An evil of the Ancient World it
seemed, such as I have never seen before,' said Aragorn. 'It was both a
shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.'

'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; 'of all elf-banes the most
deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’

'Indeed I saw uon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams 1
saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes.

'Alas! ' said Celeborn. 'We long have feared that under Caradhras a
terror slet. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred u this evil in
Moria again, 1 would have forbidden you to ass the northern borders, you
and all that went with you. And if it were ossible, one would say that at
the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net
of Moria.'

'He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely.
'Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him
knew not his mind and cannot reort his full urose. But however it may be
with the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not reent of your welcome
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothlurien, who
of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would ass nigh and would not
wish

to look uon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?

'Dark is the water of Kheled-vram, and cold are the srings of
Kibil-nvla, and fair were the many -illared halls of Khaad-dym in Elder
Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.' She looked uon
Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the
names given in his own ancient tongue, looked u and met her eyes; and it
seemed to him that he looked suddenly into the heart of an enemy and saw
there love and understanding. Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled




in answer.

He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: 'Yet more fair is
the living land of Lurien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all the ewels
that lie beneath the earth! '

There was a silence. At length Celeborn soke again. 'I did not know
that your light was so evil,’ he said. 'Let Gimli forget my harsh words: I
soke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can to aid you, each
according to his wish and need, but esecially that one of the little folk
who bears the burden.'

'Your uest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. 'But we
will not here seak of it more oenly. Yet not in vain will it rove, maybe,
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself lainly urosed.
For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of
Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the ower of kings. He has dwelt
in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years
uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I assed over the
mountains, and together through ages of the world we have fought the long
defeat.

’I it was who first summoned the White Council. And if my designs had
not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then
mayha things would have gone otherwise. But even now there is hoe left. I
will not give you counsel, saying do this, or do that. For not in doing or
contriving, nor in choosing between this course and another, can I avail;
but only in knowing what was and is, and in art also what shall be. But
this I will say to you: your Quest stands uon the edge of a knife. Stray
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hoe remains while
all the Comany is true.’

And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked
searchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and Aragorn could
long endure her glance. Sam uickly blushed and hung his head.

At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and she
smiled. 'Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight you shall
slee in eace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have
been uestioned long and deely, though no words had een soken oenly.

'Go now! ' said Celeorn. 'You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even
if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have refuge in this
City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will




not seak of your further road for a while.'

That night the Comany slet uon the ground, much to the satisfaction
of the hoits. The Elves sread for them a avilion among the trees near
the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches; then seaking words of eace
with fair elvish voices they left them. For a little while the travellers
talked of their night efore in the tree-tos, and of their day's ourney,
and of the Lord and Lady; for they had not yet the heart to look further
ack.

'What did you lush for, Sam? ’ said Piin. 'You soon roke down.
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hoe it was nothing
worse than a wicked lot to steal one of my lankets.’

'I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for est. ’If
you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I didn't like
it. She seemed to e looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she
gave me the chance of flying ack home to the Shire to a nice little hole
with-with a it of garden of my own.'

'That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost exactly what I felt myself; only,
only well, I don't think I'll say any more,' he ended lamely.

All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was
offered a choice etween a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something
that he greatly desired: clear efore his mind it lay, and to get it he had
only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest and the war against
Sauron to others.

'And it seemed to me, too,' said Gimli, 'that my choice would remain
secret and known only to myself.’

'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,' said Boromir. 'Maye it was only
a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own good urose; ut
almost I should have said that she was temting us, and offering what she
retended to have the ower to give. It need not e said that I refused to
listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.’ But what he thought
that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell.

And as for Frodo, he would not seak, though Boromir ressed him with
uestions. 'She held you long in her gae, Ring -earer,’ he said.

'Yes,' said Frodo; 'ut whatever came into my mind then I will kee
there.'

'Well, have a care! 'said Boromir. 'I do not feel too sure of this
Elvish Lady and her uroses.’




'Seak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know
not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil, unless a man
ring it hither himself . Then let him eware ! But tonight I shall slee
without fear for the first time since I left Rivendell. And may I slee
dee, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in ody and in heart.' He
cast himself down uon his couch and fell at once into a long slee.

The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream distured their
slumer. When they woke they found that the light of day was road uon the
lawn efore the avilion, and the fountain rose and fell glittering in the
sun.

They remained some days in Lothlurien, so far as they could tell or
rememer. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear, save for
a gentle rain that fell at times, and assed away leaving all things fresh
and clean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early sring, yet they
felt aout them the dee and thoughtful uiet of winter. It seemed to them
that they did little ut eat and drink and rest, and walk among the trees;
and it was enough.

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little seech
with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the Westron tongue.
Haldir had idden them farewell and gone ack again to the fences of the
North, where great watch was now ket since the tidings of Moria that the
Comany had rought. Legolas was away much among the Galadhrim, and
after

the first night he did not slee with the other comanions, though he
returned to eat and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he
went aroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.

Now as the comanions sat or walked together they soke of Gandalf, and
all that each had known and seen of him came clear efore their minds. As
they were healed of hurt and weariness of ody the grief of their loss grew
more keen. Often they heard neary Elvish voices singing, and knew that they
were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand.

Mithrandir, Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For so they
loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Comany, he would not
interret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for
him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song.

It was Frodo who first ut something of his sorrow into halting words.




He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Ri vendell he had
listened

and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that
others had made efore him. But now as he sat eside the fountain in Lurien
and heard aout him the voices of the Elves, his thought took shae in a
song that seemed fair to him; yet when he tried to reeat it to Sam only
snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves.

When evening in the Shire was grey
his footstes on the Hill were heard;
efore the dawn he went away
on ourney long without a word.

From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.

With Dwarf and Hoit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with ird on ough and east in den,
in their own secret tongues he soke.

A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a ack that ent eneath its load;
a trumet-voice, a urning rand,
a weary ilgrim on the road.

A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, uick to laugh;
an old man in a attered hat
who leaned uon a thorny staff.

He stood uon the ridge alone
and Fire and Shadow oth defied;
his staff was roken on the stone,
in Khaad-dym his wisdom died.

'Why, you'll e eating Mr. Bilo next! ' said Sam.




'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the est I can do yet.'

'Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hoe you'll say a word
aout his fireworks,' said Sam. 'Something like this:

The finest rockets ever seen:
they urst in stars of lue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of flowers.

Though that doesn't do them ustice y a long road.'

'No, I'll leave that to you, Sam. Or erhas to Bilo. But-well. I
can't talk of it any more. I can't ear to think of ringing the news to
him.'

One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight.
Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the shadow of arting
had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was very near when he must leave
Lothlurien.

'What do you think of Elves now, Sam? ’ he said. 'I asked you the same
uestion once efore-it seems a very long while ago; ut you have seen more
of them since then.'

'I have indeed! ' said Sam. 'And I reckon there's Elves and Elves.

They're all elvish enough, ut they're not all the same. Now these folk
aren't wanderers or homeless, and seem a it nearer to the likes of us: they
seem to elong here, more even than Floits do in the Shire. Whether they've
made the land, or the land's made them, it's hard to say, if you take my
meaning. It's wonderfully uiet here. Nothing seems to e going on, and
noody seems to want it to. If there's any magic aout, it's right down
dee, where I can't lay my hands on it, in a manner of seaking.'

'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo.

'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't see noody working it. No fireworks like
oor Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don't see nothing of the Lord and
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things,
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '

'I wouldn't,' said Frodo. 'I am content. And I don't miss Gandalf's
fireworks, ut his ushy eyerows, and his uick temer, and his voice.'

'You're right,' said Sam. 'And don't think I'm finding fault. I've
often wanted to see a it of magic like what it tells of in old tales, ut
I've never heard of a etter land than this. It's like eing at home and on
a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All




the same, I'm eginning to feel that if we’ve got to go on, then we'd est
get it over.

'It's the o that's never started as takes longest to finish, as my
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk can do much more
to hel us, magic or no. It's when we leave this land that we shall miss
Gandalf worse, I'm thinking.'

'I am afraid that's only too true, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Yet I hoe very
much that efore we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.'

Even as he soke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their words,
the Lady Galadriel aroaching. Tall and white and fair she walked eneath
the trees. She soke no word, ut eckoned to them.

Turning aside, she led them toward the southern sloes of the hill of
Caras Galadhon, and assing through a high green hedge they came into an
enclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay oen to the sky. The
evening star had risen and was shining with white fire aove the western
woods. Down a long flight of stes the Lady went into a dee green hollow,
through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the fountain
on the hill. At the ottom, uon a low edestal carved like a ranching
tree, stood a asin of silver, wide and shallow, and eside it stood a
silver ewer.

With water from the stream Galadriel filled the asin to the rim, and
reathed on it, and when the water was still again she soke. 'Here is the
Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. ’I have rought you here so that you may
look in it, if you will.'

The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady eside
him was tall and ale. 'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? '
asked Frodo, filled with awe.

'Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she answered, 'and to
some I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will also show
things unidden, and those are often stranger and more rofitale than
things which we wish to ehold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror
free to work, I cannot tell. For it shows things that were, and things that
are, things that yet may e. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest
cannot always tell. Do you wish to look? '

Frodo did not answer.

'And you? ’ she said, turning to Sam. 'For this is what your folk would
call magic. I elieve; though I do not understand clearly what they mean;




and they seem also to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy. But
this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you
wished to see Elf-magic? '

'I did,' said Sam, tremling a little etween fear and curiosity. Til
have a ee, Lady, if you're willing.’

'And I'd not mind a glimse of what's going on at home,' he said in an
aside to Frodo. 'It seems a terrile long time that I've een away. But
there, like as not I'll only see the stars, or something that I won't
understand.'

'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle lagh. 'Bt come, yo shall
look and see what yo may. Do not toch the water! ’

Sam climed  on the foot of the edestal and leaned over the asin.

The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it.

'There's only stars, as I thoght,' he said. Then he gave a low gas,
for the stars went ot. As if a dark veil had een withdrawn, the Mirror
grew grey, and then clear. There was sn shining, and the ranches of trees
were waving and tossing in the wind. Bt efore Sam cold make  his mind
what it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thoght he saw Frodo
with a ale face lying fast aslee nder a great dark cliff. Then he seemed
to see himself going along a dim assage, and climing an endless winding
stair. It came to him sddenly that he was looking rgently for something,
t what it was he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went
ack, and he saw the trees again. Bt this time they were not so close, and
he cold see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were
falling, crashing to the grond.

'Hi!' cried Sam in an otraged voice. 'There's that Ted Sandyman
a-ctting down trees as he sholdn't. They didn't oght to e felled: it's
that avene eyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I wish I cold
get at Ted, and I'd fell himV

Bt now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large
red-rick ilding was eing t  where it had stood. Lots of folk were
sily at work. There was a tall red chimney neary. Black smoke seemed to
clod the srface of the Mirror.

'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew what
he was aot when he wanted to send Mr. Merry ack.' Then sddenly Sam
gave

a cry and srang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. 'I mst go home.




They’ve dg  Bagshot Row, and there's the oor old gaffer going down the
Hill with his its of things on a arrow. I mst go home! ’

’Yo cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ’Yo did not wish to go home
withot yor master efore yo looked in the Mirror, and yet yo knew that
evil things might well e haening in the Shire. Rememer that the Mirror
shows many things, and not all have yet come to ass. Some never come to e,
nless those that ehold the visions trn aside from their ath to revent
them. The Mirror is dangeros as a gide of deeds.’

Sam sat on the grond and t his head in his hands. 'I wish I had
never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’ he said and fell
silent. After a moment he soke again thickly, as if strggling with tears.

'No, I’ll go home y the long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said.

'Bt I hoe I do get ack some day. If what I’ve seen trns ot tre,
someody’s going to catch it hot! ’

'Do yo now wish to look, Frodo? ’ said the Lady Galadriel. 'Yo did
not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’

'Do yo advise me to look? ’ asked Frodo.

’No,’ she said. 'I do not consel yo one way or the other. I am not a
consellor. Yo may learn something, and whether what yo see e fair or
evil, that may e rofitale, and yet it may not. Seeing is oth good and
erilos. Yet I think, Frodo, that yo have corage and wisdom enogh for
the ventre, or I wold not have roght yo here. Do as yo will! ’

'I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climed on the edestal and ent over
the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit land.
Montains loomed dark in the distance against a ale sky. A long grey road
wond ack ot of sight. Far away a figre came slowly down the road, faint
and small at first, t growing larger and clearer as it aroached.
Sddenly Frodo realied that it reminded him of Gandalf. He almost called
alod the wiard’s name, and then he saw that the figre was clothed not in
grey t in white, in a white that shone faintly in the dsk; and in its
hand there was a white staff. The head was so owed that he cold see no
face, and resently the figre trned aside rond a end in the road and
went ot of the Mirror's view. Dot came into Frodo's mind: was this a
vision of Gandalf on one of his many lonely orneys long ago, or was it
Sarman?

The vision now changed. Brief and small t very vivid he caght a
glimse of Bilo walking restlessly aot his room. The tale was littered




with disordered aers; rain was eating on the windows.

Then there was a ase, and after it many swift scenes followed that
Frodo in some way knew to e arts of a great history in which he had ecome
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen efore
t knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in a great
storm. Then he saw against the Sn, sinking lood-red into a wrack of
clods, the lack otline of a tall shi with torn sails riding  ot of
the West. Then a wide river flowing throgh a olos city. Then a white
fortress with seven towers. And then again a shi with lack sails, t now
it was morning again, and the water riled with light, and a anner earing
the emlem of a white tree shone in the sn. A smoke as of fire and attle
arose, and again the sn went down in a rning red that faded into a grey
mist; and into the mist a small shi assed away, twinkling with lights. It
vanished, and Frodo sighed and reared to draw away.

Bt sddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole had
oened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emtiness. In the lack
ayss there aeared a single Eye that slowly grew, ntil it filled nearly
all the Mirror. So terrile was it that Frodo stood rooted, nale to cry
ot or to withdraw his gae. The Eye was rimmed with fire, t was itself
glaed, yellow as a cat's, watchfl and intent, and the lack slit of its
il oened on a it, a window into nothing.

Then the Eye egan to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew
with certainty and horror that among the many things that it soght he
himself was one. Bt he also knew that it cold not see him-not yet, not
nless he willed it. The Ring that hng on its chain aot his neck grew
heavy, heavier than a great stone, and his head was dragged downwards. The
Mirror seemed to e growing hot and crls of steam were rising from the
water. He was sliing forward.

'Do not toch the water!' said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision
faded, and Frodo fond that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling in
the silver asin. He steed ack shaking all over and looked at the Lady.

V I know what it was that yo last saw,' she said; 'for that is also in
my mind. Do not e afraid! Bt do not think that only y singing amid the
trees, nor even y the slender arrows of elven-ows, is this land of
Lothlrien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say to yo, Frodo,
that even as I seak to yo, I erceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he groes ever to see me and my




thoght. Bt still the door is closed! '

She lifted  her white arms, and sread ot her hands towards the East
in a gestre of reection and denial. Edrendil, the Evening Star, most
eloved of the Elves, shone clear aove. So right was it that the figre of
the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the grond. Its rays glanced on a ring
aot her finger; it glittered like olished gold overlaid with silver
light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to
rest on her hand. Frodo gaed at the ring with awe; for sddenly it seemed
to him that he nderstood.

'Yes,' she said, divining his thoght, 'it is not ermitted to seak of
it, and Elrond cold not do so. Bt it cannot e hidden from the
Ring -earer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land of
Lrien on the finger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains. This is
Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeer.

'He ssects, t he does not know — not yet. Do yo not see now
wherefore yor coming is to s as the footste of Doom? For if yo fail,
then we are laid are to the Enemy. Yet if yo scceed, then or ower is
diminished, and Lothlrien will fade, and the tides of Time will swee it
away. We mst deart into the West, or dwindle to a rstic folk of dell and
cave, slowly to forget and to e forgotten.'

Frodo ent his head. 'And what do yo wish? ' he said at last.

'That what shold e shall e,’ she answered. 'The love of the Elves
for their land and their works is deeer than the dees of the Sea, and
their regret is ndying and cannot ever wholly e assaged. Yet they will
cast all away rather than smit to Saron: for they know him now. For the
fate of Lothlrien yo are not answerale t only for the doing of yor own
task. Yet I cold wish, were it of any avail, that the One Ring had never
een wroght, or had remained for ever lost.’

'Yo are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,' said Frodo. 'I
will give yo the One Ring, if yo ask for it. It is too great a matter for
me.’

Galadriel laghed with a sdden clear lagh. 'Wise the Lady Galadriel
may e,' she said, 'yet here she has met her match in cortesy. Gently are
yo revenged for my testing of yor heart at or first meeting. Yo egin to
see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to ask
what yo offer. For many long years I had ondered what I might do, shold
the Great Ring come into my hands, and ehold! it was roght within my




gras. The evil that was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether
Saron himself stands or falls. Wold not that have een a nole deed to set
to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it y force or fear from my gest?

'And now at last it comes. Yo will give me the Ring freely! In lace
of the Dark Lord yo will set  a Qeen. And I shall not e dark, t
eatifl and terrile as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the
Sn and the Snow on the Montain! Dreadfl as the Storm and the
Lightning !

Stronger than the fondations of the earth. All shall love me and desair! '

She lifted  her hand and from the ring that she wore there issed a
great light that illminated her alone and left all else dark. She stood
efore Frodo seeming now tall eyond measrement, and eatifl eyond
endring, terrile and worshifl. Then she let her hand fall, and the light
faded, and sddenly she laghed again, and lo! she was shrnken: a slender
elf-woman, clad in simle white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad.

'I ass the test,' she said. 'I will diminish, and go into the West and
remain Galadriel.'

They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady soke again.

'Let s retrn! ' she said. 'In the morning yo mst deart for now we have
chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.'

'I wold ask one thing efore we go,' said Frodo, 'a thing which I
often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am ermitted to wear the One
Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoghts of those that
wear them? ’

'Yo have not tried,’ she said. 'Only thrice have yo set the Ring on
yor finger since yo knew what yo ossessed. Do not try! It wold destroy
yo. Did not Gandalf tell yo that the rings give ower according to the
measre of each ossessor? Before yo cold se that ower yo wold need
to

ecome far stronger, and to train yor will to the domination of others. Yet
even so, as Ring-earer and as one that has orne it on finger and seen that
which is hidden, yor sight is grown keener. Yo have erceived my thoght
more clearly than many that are acconted wise. Yo saw the Eye of him that
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did yo not see and recognie the ring
on my finger? Did yo see my ring? ’ she asked trning again to Sam.

'No, Lady,' he answered. 'To tell yo the trth, I wondered what yo
were talking aot. I saw a star throgh yor finger. Bt if yo'll ardon




my seaking ot, I think my master was right. I wish yo'd take his Ring.
Yo'd t things to rights. Yo'd sto them digging  the gaffer and
trning him adrift. Yo'd make some folk ay for their dirty work.'

'I wold,' she said. 'That is how it wold egin. Bt it wold not sto
with that, alas! We will not seak more of it. Let s go!'




Chater 8 . Farewell to Lrien



That night the Comany was again smmoned to the chamer of Celeorn,
and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeorn
soke of their deartre.

'Now is the time,' he said, 'when those who wish to contine the Qest
mst harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no longer wish to go
forward may remain here, for a while. Bt whether they stay or go, none can
e sre of eace. For we are come now to the edge of doom. Here those who
wish may await the oncoming of the hor till either the ways of the world
lie oen again, or we smmon them to the last need of Lrien. Then they may
retrn to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
attle.’

There was a silence. 'They all resolved to go forward,’ said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.

'As for me,’ said Boromir, 'my way home lies onward and not ack.’

'That is tre,’ said Celeorn, 't is all this Comany going with yo
to Minas Tirith? ’

'We have not decided or corse,’ said Aragorn. ’Beyond Lothlrien I do
not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had
any clear rose.’

'Maye not,’ said Celeorn, 'yet when yo leave this land, yo can no
longer forget the Great River. As some of yo know well, it cannot e
crossed y travellers with aggage etween Lrien and Gondor, save y oat.
And are not the ridges of Osgiliath roken down and all the landings held
now y the Enemy?

'On which side will yo orney? The way to Minas Tirith lies on this
side, on the west; t the straight road of the Qest lies east of the
River, on the darker shore. Which shore will yo now take? ’

'If my advice is heeded, it will e the western shore, and the way to
Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. 'Bt I am not the leader of the Comany.’
The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked dotfl and troled.

'I see that yo do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeorn. 'It is not
my art to choose for yo; t I will hel yo as I may. There are some




among yo who can handle oats: Legolas, whose folk know the swift Forest
River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.'

'And one Hoit! ' cried Merry. 'Not all of s look on oats as wild
horses. My eole live y the anks of the Brandywine.'

'That is well,’ said Celeorn. 'Then I will frnish yor Comany with
oats. They mst e small and light, for if yo go far y water, there are
laces where yo will e forced to carry them. Yo will come to the raids
of Sarn Geir, and maye at last to the great falls of Raros where the
River thnders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other erils. Boats may
make yor orney less toilsome for awhile. Yet they will not give yo
consel: in the end yo mst leave them and the River, and trn west-or
east.’

Aragorn thanked Celeorn many times. The gift of oats comforted him
mch, not least ecase there wold now e no need to decide his corse for
some days. The others, too, looked more hoefl. Whatever erils lay ahead,
it seemed etter to float down the road tide of Andin to meet them than to
lod forward with ent acks. Only Sam was dotfl: he at any rate still
thoght oats as ad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that
he had srvived made him think etter of them.

'All shall e reared for yo and await yo at the haven efore noon
tomorrow,' said Celeorn. 'I will send my eole to yo in the morning to
hel yo make ready for the orney. Now we will wish yo all a fair night
and ntroled slee.'

'Good night, my friends! ' said Galadriel. 'Slee in eace! Do not
trole yor hearts overmch with thoght of the road tonight. Maye the
aths that yo each shall tread are already laid efore yor feet, thogh
yo do not see them. Good night! '

The Comany now took their leave and retrned to their avilion.
Legolas went with them, for this was to e their last night in Lothlrien,
and in site of the words of Galadriel they wished to take consel together.

For a long time they deated what they shold do, and how it wold e
est to attemt the flfilling of their rose with the Ring: t they came
to no decision. It was lain that most of them desired to go first to Minas
Tirith, and to escae at least for a while from the terror of the Enemy.

They wold have een willing to follow a leader over the River and into the
shadow of Mordor; t Frodo soke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in
his mind.




His own lan, while Gandalf remained with them, had een to go with
Boromir, and with his sword hel to deliver Gondor. For he elieved that the
message of the dreams was a smmons, and that the hor had come at last
when

the heir of Elendil shold come forth and strive with Saron for the
mastery. Bt in Moria the rden of Gandalf had een laid on him; and he
knew that he cold not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refsed in the end to
go with Boromir. And yet what hel cold he or any of the Comany give to
Frodo, save to walk lindly with him into the darkness?

'I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need e, for it is my dty,' said
Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his eyes
fixed on Frodo, as if he was trying to read the Halfling’s thoghts. At
length he soke again, softly, as if he was deating with himself. 'If yo
wish only to destroy the Ring,’ he said, "then there is little se in war
and weaons; and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot hel. Bt if yo wish to
destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then it is folly to go withot
force into his domain; and folly to throw away.' He ased sddenly, as if
he had ecome aware that he was seaking his thoghts alod. 'It wold e
folly to throw lives away, I mean,' he ended. 'It is a choice etween
defending a strong lace and walking oenly into the arms of death. At
least, that is how I see it.'

Frodo caght something new and strange in Boromir's glance, and he
looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir's thoght was different from his final
words. It wold e folly to throw away: what? The Ring o Power? He had said
something like this at the Concil, t then he had acceted the correction
o Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, t he seemed dee in his own thoght
and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir's words. And so their deate
ended. Merry and Piin were already aslee, and Sam was nodding. The
night

was growing old.

In the morning, as they were eginning to ack their slender goods,

Elves that cold seak their tonge came to them and roght them many gits
o ood and clothing or the orney. The ood was mostly in the orm o
very thin cakes, made o a meal that was aked a light rown on the otside,
and inside was the color o cream. Gimli took  one o the cakes and
looked at it with a dotl eye.

'Cram,' he said nder his reath, as he roke o a cris corner and




niled at it. His exression ickly changed, and he ate all the rest o
the cake with relish.

'No more, no more!' cried the Elves laghing. 'Yo have eaten enogh
already or a long day’s march.’

'I thoght it was only a kind o cram , sch as the Dale-men make or
orneys in the wild,’ said the Dwar.

'So it is,’ they answered. 'Bt we call it lemas or wayread, and it
is more strengthening than any ood made y Men, and it is more leasant
than cram, y all acconts.’

'Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ’Why it is etter than the honey-cakes o
the Beornings, and that is great raise, or the Beornings are the est
akers that I know o; t they are none too willing to deal ot their cakes
to travellers in these days. Yo are kindly hosts! ’

’All the same, we id yo sare the ood,’ they said. ’Eat little at a
time, and only at need. For these things are given to serve yo when all
else ails. The caes will ee sweet or many many days, i they are
nroen and let in their lea- wraings, as we have roght them. One will
ee a traveller on his eet or a day o long laor, even i he e one o
the tall Men o Minas Tirith.’

The Elves next nwraed and gave to each o the Comany the clothes
they had roght. For each they had rovided a hood and cloa, made
according to his sie, o the light t warm silen st that the Galadhrim
wove. It was hard to say o what color they were: grey with the he o
twilight nder the trees they seemed to e; and yet i they were moved, or
set in another light, they were green as shadowed leaves, or rown as allow
ields y night, ds-silver as water nder the stars. Each cloa was
astened aot the nec with a rooch lie a green lea veined with silver.

'Are these magic cloas? ’ ased Piin, looing at them with wonder.

'I do not now what yo mean y that,’ answered the leader o the
Elves. 'They are air garments, and the we is good, or it was made in this
land. They are elvish roes certainly, i that is what yo mean. Lea and
ranch, water and stone: they have the he and eaty o all these things
nder the twilight o Lrien that we love; or we t the thoght o all
that we love into all that we mae. Yet they are garments, not armor, and
they will not trn shat or lade. Bt they shold serve yo well: they are
light to wear, and warm enogh or cool enogh at need. And yo will ind
them a great aid in eeing ot o the sight o nriendly eyes, whether yo




wal among the stones or the trees. Yo are indeed high in the avor o the
Lady! For she hersel and her maidens wove this st; and never eore have
we clad strangers in the gar o or own eole.'

Ater their morning meal the Comany said arewell to the lawn y the
ontain. Their hearts were heavy; or it was a air lace, and it had
ecome lie home to them, thogh they cold not cont the days and nights
that they had assed there. As they stood or a moment looing at the white
water in the snlight, Haldir came waling towards them over the green grass
o the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight.

'I have retrned rom the Northern Fences,' said the El, 'and I am
sent now to e yor gide again. The Dimrill Dale is ll o vaor and
clods o smoe, and the montains are troled. There are noises in the
dees o the earth. I any o yo had thoght o retrning northwards to
yor homes, yo wold not have een ale to ass that way. Bt come! Yor
ath now goes soth.'

As they waled throgh Caras Galadhon the green ways were emty; t in
the trees aove them many voices were mrmring and singing. They
themselves

went silently. At last Haldir led them down the sothward sloes o the
hill, and they came again to the great gate hng with lams, and to the
white ridge; and so they assed ot and let the city o the Elves. Then
they trned away rom the aved road and too a ath that went o into a
dee thicet o mallorn-trees, and assed on, winding throgh rolling
woodlands o silver shadow, leading them ever down, sothwards and
eastwards, towards the shores o the River.

They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they came on a
high green wall. Passing throgh an oening they came sddenly ot o the
trees. Beore them lay a long lawn o shining grass, stdded with golden
elanor that glinted in the sn. The lawn ran ot into a narrow tonge
etween right margins: on the right and west the Silverlode lowed
glittering; on the let and east the Great River rolled its road waters,
dee and dar. On the rther shores the woodlands still marched on
sothwards as ar as the eye cold see, t all the ans were lea and
are. No mallorn lited its gold-hng oghs eyond the Land o Lrien.

On the an o the Silverlode, at some distance  rom the meeting o
the streams, there was a hythe o white stones and white wood. By it were
moored many oats and arges. Some were rightly ainted, and shone with




silver and gold and green, t most were either white or grey. Three small
grey oats had een made ready or the travellers, and in these the Elves
stowed their goods. And they added also coils o roe, three to each oat.
Slender they looed, t strong, silen to the toch, grey o he lie the
elven-cloas.

'What are these? ' ased Sam, handling one that lay on the
greensward.

'Roes indeed! ' answered an El rom the oats. 'Never travel ar
withot a roe! And one that is long and strong and light. Sch are these.
They may e a hel in many needs.'

'Yo don't need to tell me that! ' said Sam. I came withot any and
I've een worried ever since. Bt I was wondering what these were made o,
nowing a it aot roe -maing: it's in the amily as yo might say.'

'They are made o hithlain,' said the El, 't there is no time now to
instrct yo in the art o their maing. Had we nown that this crat
delighted yo, we cold have taght yo mch. Bt now alas! nless yo
shold at some time retrn hither, yo mst e content with or git. May it
serve yo well ! '

'Come! ' said Haldir. 'All is now ready or yo. Enter the oats! Bt
tae care at irst! ’

'Heed the words! ' said the other Elves. 'These oats are light-ilt,
and they are craty and nlie the oats o other ol. They will not sin,
lade them as yo will; t they are wayward i mishandled. It wold e wise
i yo accstomed yorselves to steing in and ot, here where there is a
landing-lace, eore yo set o downstream.'

The Comany was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in
one oat; Boromir, Merry, and Piin in another; and in the third were
Legolas and Gimli, who had now ecome ast riends. In this last oat most
o the goods and acs were stowed. The oats were moved and steered with
short-handled addles that had road lea-shaed lades. When all was ready
Aragorn led them on a trial  the Silverlode. The crrent was swit and
they went orward slowly. Sam sat in the ows, cltching the sides, and
looing ac wistlly to the shore. The snlight glittering on the water
daled his eyes. As they assed eyond the green ield o the Tonge, the
trees drew down to the river's rin. Here and there golden leaves tossed
and loated on the riling stream. The air was very right and still, and
there was a silence, excet or the high distant song o lars.




They trned a shar end in the river, and there, sailing rodly down
the stream toward them, they saw a swan o great sie. The water riled on
either side o the white reast eneath its crving nec. Its ea shone
lie rnished gold, and its eyes glinted lie et set in yellow stones; its
hge white wings were hal lited. A msic came down the river as it drew
nearer; and sddenly they erceived that it was a shi, wroght and carved
with elven-sill in the lieness o a ird. Two elves clad in white steered
it with lac addles. In the midst o the vessel sat Celeorn, and ehind
him stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet o golden lowers was in her
hair, and in her hand she held a har, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the
sond o her voice in the cool clear air:

I sang o leaves, o leaves o gold, and leaves o gold there grew:

O wind I sang, a wind there came and in the ranches lew.

Beyond the Sn, eyond the Moon, the oam was on the Sea,

And y the strand o Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.

Beneath the stars o Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,

In Eldamar eside the walls o Elven Tirion.

There long the golden leaves have grown on the ranching years,

While here eyond the Sndering Seas now all the Elven-tears.

O Lrien! The Winter comes, the are and lealess Day;

The leaves are alling in the stream, the River lows away.

O Lrien! Too long I have dwelt on this Hither Shore
And in a ading crown have twined the golden elanor.

Bt i o shis I now shold sing, what shi wold come to me,

What shi wold ear me ever ac across so wide a Sea?

Aragorn stayed his oat as the Swan-shi drew alongside. The Lady ended
her song and greeted them. 'We have come to id yo or last arewell,' she
said, 'and to seed yo with lessings rom or land.’

'Thogh yo have een or gests,’ said Celeorn, 'yo have not yet
eaten with s, and we id yo, thereore, to a arting east, here etween
the lowing waters that will ear yo ar rom Lrien.'

The Swan assed on slowly to the hythe, and they trned their oats and
ollowed it. There in the last end o Egladil on the green grass the
arting east was held; t Frodo ate and dran little, heeding only the
eaty o the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer erilos or terrile,
nor illed with hidden ower. Already she seemed to him, as y men o later
days Elves still at times are seen: resent and yet remote, a living vision




o that which has already een let ar ehind y the lowing streams o
Time.

Ater they had eaten and drn, sitting on the grass, Celeorn soe
to them again o their orney, and liting his hand he ointed soth to the
woods eyond the Tonge.

'As yo go down the water,' he said, 'yo will ind that the trees will
ail, and yo will come to a arren contry. There the River lows in stony
vale amid high moors, ntil at last ater many leages it comes to the tall
island o the Tindroc, that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its arms
aot the stee shores o the isle, and alls then with a great noise and
smoe over the cataracts o Raros down into the Nindal, the Wetwang as it
is called in yor tonge. That is a wide region o slggish en where the
stream ecomes tortos and mch divided. There the Entwash lows in y
many

moths rom the Forest o Fangorn in the west. Aot that stream, on this
side o the Great River, lies Rohan. On the rther side are the lea hills
o the Emyn Mil. The wind lows rom the East there, or they loo ot over
the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the lac gates o
Mordor.

'Boromir, and any that go with him seeing Minas Tirith, will do well
to leave the Great River aove Raros and cross the Entwash eore it inds
the marshes. Yet they shold not go too ar  that stream, nor ris
ecoming entangled in the Forest o Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is
now little nown. Bt Boromir and Aragorn dotless do not need this
warning.'

'Indeed we have heard o Fangorn in Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. 'Bt
what I have heard seems to me or the most art old wives' tales, sch as we
tell to or children. All that lies north o Rohan is now to s so ar away
that ancy can wander reely there. O old Fangorn lay on the orders o
or realm; t it is now many lives o men since any o s visited it, to
rove or disrove the legends that have come down rom distant years.

'I have mysel een at whiles in Rohan, t I have never crossed it
northwards. When I was sent ot as a messenger, I assed throgh the Ga y
the sirts o the White Montains, and crossed the Isen and the Grey lood
into Northerland. A long and wearisome orney. For hndred leages I
reconed it, and it too me many months; or I lost my horse at Tharad, at
the ording o the Greylood. Ater that orney, and the road I have




trodden with this Comany, I do not mch dot that I shall ind a way
throgh Rohan, and Fangorn too, i need e.'

'Then I need say no more,' said Celeorn. 'Bt do not desise the lore
that has come down rom distant years; or ot it may chance that old wives
ee in memory word o things that once were needl or the wise to now.'

Now Galadriel rose rom the grass, and taing a c rom one o her
maidens she illed it with white mead and gave it to Celeorn.

'Now it is time to drin the c o arewell,' she said. 'Drin, Lord
o the Galadhrim! And let not yor heart e sad thogh night mst ollow
noon, and already or evening draweth nigh.’

Then she roght the c to each o the Comany, and ade them drin
and arewell. Bt when they had drn she commanded them to sit again on the
grass, and chairs were set or her and or Celeorn. Her maidens stood
silent aot her, and a while she looed on her gests. At last she soe
again.

'We have drn the c o arting,' she said, 'and the shadows all
etween s. Bt eore yo go, I have roght in my shi gits which the
Lord and Lady o the Galadhrim now oer yo in memory o Lothlrien.'

Then

she called to each in trn.

'Here is the git o Celeorn and Galadriel to the leader o yor
Comany,' she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had een made
to it his sword. It was overlaid with a tracery o lowers and leaves
wroght o silver and gold, and on it were set in elven rnes ormed o many
gems the name And®ril and the lineage o the sword.

'The lade that is drawn rom this sheath shall not e stained or
roen even in deeat,' she said. 'Bt is there aght else that yo desire
o me at or arting? For darness will low etween s, and it may e that
we shall not meet again, nless it e ar hence on a road that has no
retrning.’

And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, yo now all my desire, and long held in
eeing the only treasre that I see. Yet it is not yors to give me, even
i yo wold; and only throgh darness shall I come to it.'

'Yet maye this will lighten yor heart,' said Galadriel; 'or it was
let in my care to e given to yo, shold yo ass throgh this land.’ Then
she lited rom her la a great stone o a clear green, set in a silver
rooch that was wroght in the lieness o an eagle with otsread wings;




and as she held it  the gem lashed lie the sn shining throgh the
leaves o sring. 'This stone I gave to Celernan my daghter, and she to
hers; and now it comes to yo as a toen o hoe. In this hor tae the name
that was oretold or yo, Elessar, the Elstone o the hose o Elendil! ’

Then Aragorn too the stone and inned the rooch on his reast, and
those who saw him wondered; or they had not mared eore how tall and
ingly he stood, and it seemed to them that many years o toil had allen
rom his sholders. 'For the gits that yo have given me I than yo,’ he
said, 'O Lady o Lrien o whom were srng Celernan and Arwen
Evenstar.

What raise cold I say more? '

The Lady owed her head, and she trned then to Boromir, and to him she
gave a elt o gold; and to Merry and Piin she gave small silver elts,
each with a clas wroght lie a golden lower. To Legolas she gave a ow
sch as the Galadhrim sed, longer and stoter than the ows o Mirwood,
and strng with a string o el-hair. With it went a iver o arrows.

'For yo little gardener and lover o trees,' she said to Sam, 'I have
only a small git.’ She t into his hand a little ox o lain grey wood,
nadorned save or a single silver rne on the lid. 'Here is set G or
Galadriel,' she said; 't also it may stand or garden in yor tonge. In
this ox there is earth rom my orchard, and sch lessing as Galadriel has
still to estow is on it. It will not ee yo on yor road, nor deend
yo against any eril; t i yo ee it and see yor home again at last,
then erhas it may reward yo. Thogh yo shold ind all arren and laid
waste, there will e ew gardens in Middle-earth that will loom lie yor
garden, i yo srinle this earth there. Then yo may rememer Galadriel,
and catch a glimse ar o o Lrien, that yo have seen only in or
winter. For or sring and or smmer are gone y, and they will never e
seen on earth again save in memory.'

Sam went red to the ears and mttered something inadile, as he
cltched the ox and owed as well as he cold.

'And what git wold a Dwar as o the Elves? ' said Galadriel trning
to Gimli.

'None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. 'It is enogh or me to have seen the
Lady o the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.'

'Hear all ye Elves! ’ she cried to those aot her. 'Let none say again
that Dwarves are grasing and ngracios! Yet srely, Gimli son o Glin,




yo desire something that I cold give? Name it, I id yo! Yo shall not e
the only gest withot a git.'

'There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,' said Gimli, owing low and
stammering. 'Nothing, nless it might e-nless it is ermitted to as. nay,
to name a single strand o yor hair, which srasses the gold o the earth
as the stars srass the gems o the mine. I do not as or sch a git. Bt
yo commanded me to name my desire.’

The Elves stirred and mrmred with astonishment, and Celeorn gaed at
the Dwar in wonder, t the Lady smiled. ’It is said that the sill o the
Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tonges ’ she said; 'yet that
is not tre o Gimli. For none have ever made to me a reest so old and
yet so corteos. And how shall I rese, since I commanded him to sea?
Bt tell me, what wold yo do with sch a git? ’

'Treasre it, Lady,’ he answered, 'in memory o yor words to me at or
irst meeting. And i ever I retrn to the smithies o my home, it shall e
set in imerishale crystal to e an heirloom o my hose, and a ledge o
good will etween the Montain and the Wood ntil the end o days.’

Then the Lady nraided one o her long tresses, and ct o three
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli’s hand. 'These words shall go with the
git,’ she said. 'I do not oretell, or all oretelling is now vain: on the
one hand lies darness, and on the other only hoe. Bt i hoe shold not
ail, then I say to yo, Gimli son o Glin, that yor hands shall low with
gold, and yet over yo gold shall have no dominion.

'And yo, Ring-earer,’ she said, trning to Frodo. 'I come to yo last
who are not last in my thoghts. For yo I have reared this.’ She held
a small crystal hial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays o white light
srang rom her hand. ’In this hial,’ she said, 'is caght the light o
Edrendil’s star, set amid the waters o my ontain. It will shine still
righter when night is aot yo. May it e a light to yo in dar laces,
when all other lights o ot. Rememer Galadriel and her Mirror! ’

Frodo too the hial, and or a moment as it shone etween them, he saw
her aain standin lie a een, reat and eatil, t no loner
terrile. He owed, t ond no words to say.

Now the Lady arose, and Celeorn led them ac to the hythe. A yellow
noon lay on the reen land o the Tone, and the water littered with
silver. All at last was made ready. The Comany too their laces in the
oats as eore. Cryin arewell, the Elves o Lrien with lon rey oles




thrst them ot into the lowin stream, and the rilin waters ore them
slowly away. The travellers sat still withot movin or seain. On the
reen an near to the very oint o the Tone the Lady Galadriel stood
alone and silent. As they assed her they trned and their eyes watched her
slowly loatin away rom them. For so it seemed to them: Lrien was
sliin acward, lie a riht shi masted with enchanted trees, sailin
on to orotten shores, while they sat helless on the marin o the rey
and lealess world.

Even as they aed, the Silverlode assed ot into the crrents o the
Great River, and their oats trned and ean to seed sothwards. Soon the
white orm o the Lady was small and distant. She shone lie a window o
lass on a ar hill in the westerin sn, or as a remote lae seen rom a
montain: a crystal allen in the la o the land. Then it seemed to Frodo
that she lited her arms in a inal arewell, and ar t iercin-clear on
the ollowin wind came the sond o her voice sinin. Bt now she san in
the ancient tone o the Elves eyond the Sea, and he did not nderstand
the words: air was the msic, t it did not comort him.

Yet as is the way o Elvish words, they remained raven in his memory,
and lon aterwards he interreted them, as well as he cold: the lanae
was that o Elven-son and soe o thins little nown on Middle-earth.

Ai! laril lantar lassi s®rinen,

Yni ®ntiml ve rmar aldaron!

Yni ve lintl yldar avnier
mi oromardi lisse-mirvreva
And®nl ella, Vardo tellmar
n lini yassen tintilar i eleni
maryo airetri-lnrinen.

Sn man iylma nin enantva?

An sn Tintalll Varda Oiolosslo
ve anyar mryat Elentri ortanl
ar ilyl tier ndlvl lmll;
ar sindanriello caita mornil
i almalinnar iml met, ar hnsil
nt®a Calaciryo mnri oiall.

Si vanwa n, Rmello vanwa, Valimar!




Namril! Nai hirvalyl Valimar.

Nai elyl hirva. Namril!

'Ah! lie old all the leaves in the wind, lon years nmerless as
the wins o trees ! The lon years have assed lie swit drahts o the
sweet mead in loty halls eyond the West, eneath the le valts o Varda
wherein the stars tremle in the son o her voice, holy and eenly. Who
now shall reill the c or me? For now the Kindler, Varda, the Qeen o
the Stars, rom Mont Everwhite has lited her hands lie clods, and all
aths are drowned dee in shadow; and ot o a rey contry darness lies on
the oamin waves etween s, and mist covers the ewels o Calacirya or
ever. Now lost, lost to those rom the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maye tho
shalt ind Valimar. Maye even tho shalt ind it. Farewell! ' Varda is the
name o that Fady whom the Elves in these lands o exile name Elereth.

Sddenly the River swet rond a end, and the ans rose on either
side, and the liht o Frien was hidden. To that air land Frodo never came
aain.

The travellers now trned their aces to the orney; the sn was
eore them, and their eyes were daled, or all were illed with tears.

Gimli wet oenly.

'I have looed the last on that which was airest,' he said to
Feolas his comanion. 'Henceorward I will call nothin air, nless it e
her it.' He t his hand to his reast.

'Tell me, Feolas, why did I come on this Qest? Tittle did I now
where the chie eril lay! Trly Elrond soe, sayin that we cold not
oresee what we miht meet on or road. Torment in the dar was the daner
that I eared, and it did not hold me ac. Bt I wold not have come, had I
nown the daner o liht and oy. Now I have taen my worst wond in this
artin, even i I were to o this niht straiht to the Dar Ford. Alas or
Gimli son o Glin! ’

'Nay! ’ said Feolas. 'Alas or s all! And or all that wal the world
in these ater-days. For sch is the way o it: to ind and lose, as it
seems to those whose oat is on the rnnin stream. Bt I cont yo lessed,
Gimli son o Glin: or yor loss yo ser o yor own ree will, and yo
miht have chosen otherwise. Bt yo have not orsaen yor comanions,
and

the least reward that yo shall have is that the memory o Fothlrien shall
remain ever clear and nstained in yor heart, and shall neither ade nor




row stale.'

'Maye,' said Gimli; 'and I than yo or yor words. Tre words
dotless; yet all sch comort is cold. Memory is not what the heart
desires. That is only a mirror, e it clear as Kheled-vram. Or so says the
heart o Gimli the Dwar. Elves may see thins otherwise. Indeed I have
heard that or them memory is more lie to the wain world than to a dream.
Not so or Dwarves.

'Bt let s tal no more o it. Loo to the oat! She is too low in the
water with all this aae, and the Great River is swit. I do not wish to
drown my rie in cold water.' He too  a addle, and steered towards the
western an, ollowin Araorn's oat ahead, which had already moved ot o
the middle stream.

So the Comany went on their lon way, down the wide hrryin waters,
orne ever sothwards. Bare woods staled alon either an, and they cold
not see any limse o the lands ehind. The reee died away and the River
lowed withot a sond. No voice o ird roe the silence. The sn rew
misty as the day rew old, ntil it leamed in a ale sy lie a hih white
earl. Then it aded into the West, and ds came early, ollowed y a rey
and starless niht. Far into the dar iet hors they loated on, idin
their oats nder the overhanin shadows o the western woods. Great trees
assed y lie hosts, thrstin their twisted thirsty roots throh the
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and listened to
the aint la and rle o the River rettin amon the tree-roots and
dritwood near the shore, ntil his head nodded and he ell into an neasy
slee.




Chater 9 . The Great River



Frodo was rosed y Sam. He ond that he was lyin, well wraed,
nder tall rey -sinned trees in a iet corner o the woodlands on the west
an o the Great River, Andin. He had slet the niht away, and the rey
o mornin was dim amon the are ranches. Gimli was sy with a small ire
near at hand.

They started aain eore the day was road. Not that most o the
Comany were eaer to hrry sothwards: they were content that the decision,
which they mst mae at latest when they came to Raros and the Tindroc
Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River ear them on at its
own ace, havin no desire to hasten towards the erils that lay eyond,
whichever corse they too in the end. Araorn let them drit with the
stream as they wished, hsandin their strenth aainst weariness to come.
Bt he insisted that at least they shold start early each day and orney
on ar into the evenin; or he elt in his heart that time was ressin,
and he eared that the Dar Lord had not een idle while they linered in
Lrien.

Nonetheless they saw no sin o an enemy that day, nor the next. The
dll rey hors assed withot event. As the third day o their voyae wore
on the lands chaned slowly: the trees thinned and then ailed altoether.

On the eastern an to their let they saw lon ormless sloes stretchin
 and away toward the sy; rown and withered they looed, as i ire had
assed over them, leavin no livin lade o reen: an nriendly waste
withot even a roen tree or a old stone to relieve the emtiness. They
had come to the Brown Lands that lay, vast and desolate, etween Sothern
Mirwood and the hills o the Emyn Mil. What estilence or war or evil deed
o the Enemy had so lasted all that reion even Araorn cold not tell.

Uon the west to their riht the land was treeless also, t it was
lat, and in many laces reen with wide lains o rass. On this side o
the River they assed orests o reat reeds, so tall that they sht ot all
view to the west, as the little oats went rstlin y alon their
ltterin orders. Their dar withered lmes ent and tossed in the liht
cold airs, hissin sotly and sadly. Here and there throh oenins Frodo
cold catch sdden limses o rollin meads, and ar eyond them hills in




the snset, and away on the ede o siht a dar line, where marched the
sothernmost rans o the Misty Montains.

There was no sin o livin movin thins, save irds. O these there
were many: small owl whistlin and iin in the reeds, t they were
seldom seen. Once or twice the travellers heard the rsh and whine o
swan-wins, and looin  they saw a reat halanx streamin alon the sy.
'Swans! ' said Sam. 'And mihty i ones too! ’

'Yes,' said Araorn, ’and they are lac swans.'

'How wide and emty and mornl all this contry loos! ’ said Frodo.

'I always imained that as one orneyed soth it ot warmer and merrier,
ntil winter was let ehind or ever.’

’Bt we have not orneyed ar soth yet,’ answered Araorn. 'It is
still winter, and we are ar rom the sea. Here the world is cold ntil the
sdden srin, and we may yet have snow aain. Far away down in the Bay o
Belalas, to which Andin rns, it is warm and merry, maye, or wold e t
or the Enemy. Bt here we are not aove sixty leaes, I ess, soth o
the Sotharthin away in yor Shire, hndreds o lon miles yonder. Yo are
looin now soth-west across the north lains o the Riddermar, Rohan the
land o the Horse-lords. Ere lon we shall come to the moth o the Limliht
that rns down rom Fanorn to oin the Great River. That is the north
ondary o Rohan; and o old all that lay etween Limliht and the White
Montains eloned to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and leasant land, and its
rass has no rival; t in these evil days ol do not dwell y the River or
ride oten to its shores. Andin is wide, yet the ores can shoot their
arrows ar across the stream; and o late, it is said, they have dared to
cross the water and raid the herds and stds o Rohan.’

Sam looed rom an to an neasily. The trees had seemed hostile
eore, as i they harored secret eyes and lrin daners; now he wished
that the trees were still there. He elt that the Comany was too naed,
aloat in little oen oats in the midst o shelterless lands, and on a
river that was the rontier o war.

In the next day or two, as they went on, orne steadily sothwards,
this eelin o insecrity rew on all the Comany. For a whole day they
too to their addles and hastened orward. The ans slid y. Soon the
River roadened and rew more shallow; lon stony eaches lay on the east,
and there were ravel-shoals in the water, so that carel steerin was
needed. The Brown Lands rose into lea wolds, over which lowed a chill air




rom the East. On the other side the meads had ecome rollin downs o
withered rass amidst a land o en and tssoc. Frodo shivered, thinin o
the lawns and ontains, the clear sn and entle rains o Lothlrien. There
was little seech and no lahter in any o the oats. Each memer o the
Comany was sy with his own thohts.

The heart o Leolas was rnnin nder the stars o a smmer niht in
some northern lade amid the eech- woods; Gimli was inerin old in his
mind, and wonderin i it were it to e wroht into the hosin o the
Lady's it. Merry and Piin in the middle oat were ill at ease, or
Boromir sat mtterin to himsel, sometimes itin his nails, as i some
restlessness or dot consmed him, sometimes seiin a addle and drivin
the oat close ehind Araorn's. Then Piin, who sat in the ow looin
ac, caht a eer leam in his eye, as he eered orward ain at Frodo.
Sam had lon ao made  his mind that, thoh oats were maye not as
daneros as he had een roht  to elieve, they were ar more
ncomortale than even he had imained. Fie was cramed and miserale,
havin nothin to do t stare at the winter -lands crawlin y and the rey
water on either side o him. Even when the addles were in se they did not
trst Sam with one.

As ds drew down on the orth day, he was looin ac over the owed
heads o Frodo and Araorn and the ollowin oats; he was drowsy and
loned

or cam and the eel o earth nder his toes. Sddenly somethin caht his
siht: at irst he stared at it listlessly, then he sat  and red his
eyes; t when he looed aain he cold not see it any more.

That niht they camed on a small eyot close to the western an. Sam
lay rolled in lanets eside Frodo. V I had a nny dream an hor or two
eore we stoed, Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'Or maye it wasn't a dream. Fnny
it was anyway.'

'Well, what was it? ' said Frodo, nowin that Sam wold not settle
down ntil he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thoht
o anythin to mae me smile since we let Lothlrien.'

'It wasn't nny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was eer. All wron, i it
wasn't a dream. And yo had est hear it. It was lie this: I saw a lo with
eyes! '

'The lo's all riht,' said Frodo. 'There are many in the River. Bt
leave ot the eyes ! ’




'That I won't,' said Sam. ' 'Twas the eyes as made me sit , so to
sea. I saw what I too to e a lo loatin alon in the hal-liht ehind
Gimli's oat; t I didn't ive mch heed to it. Then it seemed as i the
lo was slowly catchin s . And that was ecliar, as yo miht say,
seein as we were all loatin on the stream toether. Jst then I saw the
eyes: two ale sort o oints, shiny -lie, on a hm at the near end o the
lo. What's more, it wasn't a lo, or it had addle-eet, lie a swan's
almost, only they seemed ier, and et diin in and ot o the water.

'That's when I sat riht  and red my eyes, meanin to ive a
shot, i it was still there when I had red the drowse ot o my head.

For the whatever -it-was was comin alon ast now and ettin close ehind
Gimli. Bt whether those two lams sotted me movin and starin, or whether
I came to my senses, I don't now. When I looed aain, it wasn't there. Yet
I thin I caht a limse with the tail o-my eye, as the sayin is, o
somethin dar shootin nder the shadow o the an. I coldn't see no more
eyes thoh.

'I said to mysel: "dreamin aain, Sam Gamee," I said: and I said no
more st then. Bt I've een thinin since, and now I'm not so sre. What
do yo mae o it, Mr. Frodo? '

'I shold mae nothin o it t a lo and the ds and slee in yor
eyes Sam, said Frodo, i this was the irst time that those eyes had een
seen. Bt it isn't. I saw them away ac north eore we reached Lrien. And
I saw a strane creatre with eyes climin to the let that niht. Haldir
saw it too. And do yo rememer the reort o the Elves that went ater the
ore-and? '

'Ah,' said Sam. 'I do; and I rememer more too. I don't lie my
thohts; t thinin o one thin and another, and Mr. Bilo's stories and
all, I ancy I cold t a name on the creatre, at a ess. A nasty name.
Gollm, maye? '

'Yes, that is what I have eared or some time,' said Frodo. 'Ever
since the niht on the let. I sose he was lrin in Moria, and iced
 or trail then; t I hoed that or stay in Lrien wold throw him o
the scent aain. The miserale creatre mst have een hidin in the woods
y the Silverlode, watchin s start o! ’

'That's aot it,' said Sam. 'And we'd etter e a it more watchl
orselves, or we'll eel some nasty iners rond or necs one o these
nihts, i we ever wae  to eel anythin. And that's what I was leadin




 to. No need to trole Strider or the others toniht. I'll ee watch. I
can slee tomorrow, ein no more than lae in a oat, as yo miht say.'

V I miht,' said Frodo, 'and I miht say "lae with eyes". Yo shall
watch; t only i yo romise to wae me halway towards mornin, i
nothin haens eore then.'

In the dead hors Frodo came ot o a dee dar slee to ind Sam
shain him. 'It's a shame to wae yo,' whisered Sam, 't that's what yo
said. There's nothin to tell, or not mch. I thoht I heard some sot
lashin and a sniin noise, a while ac; t yo hear a lot o sch
eer sonds y a river at niht.'

He lay down, and Frodo sat , hddled in his lanets, and oht o
his slee. Mintes or hors assed slowly, and nothin haened. Frodo was
st yieldin to the temtation to lie down aain when a dar shae, hardly
visile, loated close to one o the moored oats. A lon whitish hand cold
e dimly seen as it shot ot and raed the nwale; two ale lamlie eyes
shone coldly as they eered inside, and then they lited and aed  at
Frodo on the eyot. They were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo
heard the sot hiss o intaen reath. He stood , drawin Stin rom its
sheath, and aced the eyes. Immediately their liht was sht o. There was
another hiss and a slash, and the dar lo-shae shot away downstream into
the niht. Araorn stirred in his slee, trned over, and sat '

'What is it? ' he whisered, srinin  and comin to Frodo. 'I elt
somethin in my slee. Why have yo drawn yor sword? '

'Gollm,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I ess.'

'Ah! ' said Araorn. 'So yo now aot or little ootad, do yo? He
added ater s all throh Moria and riht down to Nimrodel. Since we too
to oats, he has een lyin on a lo and addlin with hands and eet. I
have tried to catch him once or twice at niht; t he is slier than a ox,
and as sliery as a ish. I hoed the river-voyae wold eat him, t he
is too clever a waterman.

'We shall have to try oin aster tomorrow. Yo lie down now, and I
will ee watch or what is let o the niht. I wish I cold lay my hands
on the wretch. We miht mae him sel. Bt i I cannot, we shall have to
try and lose him. He is very daneros. Qite aart rom mrder y niht on
his own accont, he may t any enemy that is aot on or trac.'

The niht assed withot Gollm showin so mch as a shadow aain.
Ater that the Comany et a shar loo-ot, t they saw no more o Gollm




while the voyae lasted. I he was still ollowin, he was very wary and
cnnin. At Araorn’s iddin they addled now or lon sells, and the
ans went switly y. Bt they saw little o the contry, or they
orneyed mostly y niht and twiliht, restin y day, and lyin as hidden
as the land allowed. In this way the time assed withot event ntil the
seventh day.

The weather was still rey and overcast, with wind rom the East, t
as evenin drew into niht the sy away westward cleared, and ools o aint
liht, yellow and ale reen, oened nder the rey shores o clod. There
the white rind o the new Moon cold e seen limmerin in the remote laes.
Sam looed at it and cered his rows.

The next day the contry on either side ean to chane raidly. The
ans ean to rise and row stony. Soon they were assin throh a hilly
rocy land, and on oth shores there were stee sloes ried in dee raes
o thorn and sloe, tanled with ramles and creeers. Behind them stood low
crmlin clis, and chimneys o rey weathered stone dar with ivy; and
eyond these aain there rose hih rides crowned with wind-writhen irs.
They were drawin near to the rey hill -contry o the Emyn Mil, the
sothern march o Wilderland.

There were many irds aot the clis and the roc-chimneys, and all
day hih in the air locs o irds had een circlin, lac aainst the
ale sy. As they lay in their cam that day Araorn watched the lihts
dotlly, wonderin i Gollm had een doin some mischie and the news
o

their voyae was now movin in the wilderness. Later as the sn was settin,
and the Comany was stirrin and ettin ready to start aain, he descried a
dar sot aainst the adin liht: a reat ird hih and ar o, now
wheelin, now lyin on slowly sothwards.

’What is that, Leolas? ' he ased, ointin to the northern sy. 'Is
it, as I thin, an eale? '

’Yes.' said Leolas. 'It is an eale, a hntin eale. I wonder what
that oreodes. It is ar rom the montains.'

'We will not start ntil it is lly dar,' said Araorn.

The eihth niht o their orney came. It was silent and windless; the
rey east wind had assed away. The thin crescent o the Moon had allen
early into the ale snset, t the sy was clear aove, and thoh ar away
in the Soth there were reat ranes o clod that still shone aintly, in




the West stars linted riht.

'Come! ' said Araorn. 'We will ventre one more orney y niht. We
are comin to reaches o the River that I do not now well: or I have never
orneyed y water in these arts eore, not etween here and the raids o
Sarn Geir. Bt i I am riht in my reconin, those are still many miles
ahead. Still there are daneros laces even eore we come there: rocs and
stony eyots in the stream. We mst ee a shar watch and not try to addle
switly.’

To Sam in the leadin oat was iven the tas o watchman. He lay
orward eerin into the loom. The niht rew dar, t the stars aove
were stranely riht, and there was a limmer On the ace o the River. It
was close on midniht, and they had een dritin or some while, hardly
sin the addles, when sddenly Sam cried ot. Only a ew yards ahead dar
shaes loomed  in the stream and he heard the swirl o racin water. There
was a swit crrent which swn let, towards the eastern shore where the
channel was clear. As they were swet aside the travellers cold see, now
very close, the ale oam o the River lashin aainst shar rocs that were
thrst ot ar into the stream lie a ride o teeth. The oats were all
hddled toether.

'Hoy there, Araorn! ’ shoted Boromir, as his oat med into the
leader. 'This is madness! We cannot dare the Raids y niht! Bt no oat
can live in Sarn Geir, e it niht or day.’

'Bac, ac! ’ cried Araorn. Trn! Trn i yo can! ’ He drove his
addle into the water, tryin to hold the oat and rin it rond.

’I am ot o my reconin,’ he said to Frodo. ’I did not now that we
had come so ar: Andin lows aster than I thoht. Sarn Geir mst e
close at hand already.’

With reat eorts they checed the oats and slowly roht them
aot; t at irst they cold mae only small headway aainst the crrent,
and all the time they were carried nearer and nearer to the eastern an.

Now dar and ominos it loomed  in the niht.

’All toether, addle! ’ shoted Boromir. ’Paddle! Or we shall e
driven on the shoals.’ Even as he soe Frodo elt the eel eneath him
rate on stone.

At that moment there was a twan o owstrins: several arrows whistled
over them, and some ell amon them. One smote Frodo etween the
sholders




and he lrched orward with a cry, lettin o his addle: t the arrow ell
ac, oiled y his hidden coat o mail. Another assed throh Araorn's
hood; and a third stood ast in the nwale o the second oat, close y
Merry's hand. Sam thoht he cold limse lac ires rnnin to and ro
on the lon shinle -ans that lay nder the eastern shore. They seemed
very near.

' Yrch !' said Leolas, allin into his own tone.

'Ores! ' cried Gimli.

'Gollm's doin, I'll e ond.' said Sam to Frodo. 'And a nice lace
to choose, too. The River seems set on tain s riht into their arms! '

They all leaned orward strainin at the addles: even Sam too a hand.
Every moment they exected to eel the ite o lac -eathered arrows. Many
whined overhead or strc the water neary; t there were no more hits. It
was dar, t not too dar or the niht-eyes o Ores, and in the
star-limmer they mst have oered their cnnin oes some mar, nless it
was that the rey cloas O Lrien and the rey timer o the el- wroht
oats deeated the malice o the archers o Mordor.

Stroe y stroe they laored on. In the darness it was hard to e
sre that they were indeed movin at all; t slowly the swirl o the water
rew less, and the shadow o the eastern an aded ac into the niht. At
last, as ar as they cold de, they had reached the middle o the stream
aain and had driven their oats ac some distance aove the ttin rocs.
Then hal trnin they thrst them with all their strenth towards the
western shore. Under the shadow O shes leanin ot over the water they
halted and drew reath.

Leolas laid down his addle and too  the ow that he had roht
rom Lrien. Then he sran ashore and climed a ew aces  the an.
Strinin the ow and ittin an arrow he trned, eerin ac over the
River into the darness. Across the water there were shrill cries, t
nothin cold e seen.

Frodo looed  at the El standin tall aove him, as he aed into
the niht, seein a mar to shoot at. His head was dar, crowned with shar
white stars that littered in the lac ools o the sy ehind. Bt now
risin and sailin  rom the Soth the reat clods advanced, sendin ot
dar otriders into the starry ields. A sdden dread ell on the Comany.

' Elereth Gilthoniel!' sihed Leolas as he looed . Even as he did
so, a dar shae, lie a clod and yet not a clod, or it moved ar more




switly, came ot o the lacness in the Soth, and sed towards the
Comany, lottin ot all liht as it aroached. Soon it aeared as a
reat wined creatre, lacer than the its in the niht. Fierce voices
rose  to reet it rom across the water. Frodo elt a sdden chill rnnin
throh him and cltchin at his heart; there was a deadly cold, lie the
memory o an old wond, in his sholder. He croched down, as i to hide.

Sddenly the reat ow o Lrien san. Shrill went the arrow rom the
elven-strin. Frodo looed . Almost aove him the wined shae swerved.
There was a harsh croain scream, as it ell ot o the air, vanishin down
into the loom o the eastern shore. The sy was clean aain. There was a
tmlt o many voices ar away, crsin and wailin in the darness, and
then silence. Neither shat nor cry came aain rom the east that niht.

Ater a while Araorn led the oats ac stream. They elt their way
alon the water’s ede or some distance, ntil they ond a small shallow
ay. A ew low trees rew there close to the water, and ehind them rose a
stee rocy an. Here the Comany decided to stay and await the dawn: it
was seless to attemt to move rther y niht. They made no cam and lit
no ire, t lay hddled in the oats, moored close toether.

’Praised e the ow o Galadriel, and the hand and eye o Leolas ! ’
said Gimli, as he mnched a waer o lemas. 'That was a mihty shot in the
dar, my riend!'

'Bt who can say what it hit?' said Leolas.

'I cannot,' said Gimli. 'Bt I am lad that the shadow came no nearer.

I lied it not at all. Too mch it reminded me o the shadow in Moria — the
shadow o the Balro,' he ended in a whiser.

'It was not a Balro,' said Frodo, still shiverin with the chill that
had come on him. 'It was somethin colder. I thin it was — ' Then he
ased and ell silent.

'What do yo thin? ' ased Boromir eaerly, leanin rom his oat, as
i he was tryin to catch a limse o Frodo's ace.

'I thin — No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. 'Whatever it was, its
all has dismayed or enemies.'

'So it seems,' said Araorn. 'Yet where they are, and how many, and
what they will do next, we do not now. This niht we mst all e sleeless!
Dar hides s now. Bt what the day will show who can tell? Have yor
weaons close to hand! '

Sam sat tain the hilt o his sword as i he were contin on his




iners, and looin  at the sy. "It's very strane,' he mrmred. 'The
Moon's the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it oht to e. Bt
either it's ot o its rnnin, or I'm all wron in my reconin. Yo'll
rememer, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was wanin as we lay on the let  in that
tree: a wee rom the ll, I recon. And we'd een a wee on the way last
niht, when  os a New Moon as thin as a nail-arin, as i we had never
stayed no time in the Elvish contry.

'Well, I can rememer three nihts there or certain, and I seem to
rememer several more, t I wold tae my oath it was never a whole month.
Anyone wold thin that time did not cont in there! ’

'And erhas that was the way o it,’ said Frodo. 'In that land, maye,
we were in a time that has elsewhere lon one y. It was not, I thin,
ntil Silverlode ore s ac to Andin that we retrned to the time that
lows throh mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't rememer any moon,
either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars y niht and sn y day.'

Leolas stirred in his oat. 'Nay, time does not tarry ever,' he said;

't chane and rowth is not in all thins and laces alie. For the Elves
the world moves, and it moves oth very swit and very slow. Swit, ecase
they themselves chane little, and all else leets y: it is a rie to
them. Slow, ecase they do not cont the rnnin years, not or themselves.
The assin seasons are t riles ever reeated in the lon lon stream.

Yet eneath the Sn all thins mst wear to an end at last.’

'Bt the wearin is slow in Lrien,' said Frodo. 'The ower o the Lady
is on it. Rich are the hors, thoh short they seem, in Caras Galadhon,
where Galadriel wields the Elven-rin.’

'That shold not have een said otside Lrien, not even to me,' said
Araorn. 'Sea no more o it! Bt so it is, Sam: in that land yo lost yor
cont. There time lowed switly y s, as or the Elves. The old moon
assed, and a new moon waxed and waned in the world otside, while we
tarried there. And yestereve a new moon came aain. Winter is nearly one.
Time lows on to a srin o little hoe.’

The niht assed silently. No voice or call was heard aain across the
water. The travellers hddled in their oats elt the chanin o the
weather. The air rew warm and very still nder the reat moist clods that
had loated  rom the Soth and the distant seas. The rshin o the River
over the rocs o the raids seemed to row loder and closer. The twis o
the trees aove them ean to dri.




When the day came the mood o the world aot them had ecome sot and
sad. Slowly the dawn rew to a ale liht, dised and shadowless. There
was mist on the River, and white o swathed the shore; the ar an cold
not e seen.

'I can't aide o,' said Sam; 't this seems to e a lcy one. Now
erhas we can et away withot those crsed olins seein s.'

'Perhas so,' said Araorn. 'Bt it will e hard to ind the ath
nless the o lits a little later on. And we mst ind the ath, i we are
to ass Sarn Geir and come to the Emyn Mil.'

'I do not see why we shold ass the Raids or ollow the River any
rther,' said Boromir. 'I the Emyn Mil lie eore s, then we can aandon
these cocle-oats, and strie westward and sothward, ntil we come to the
Entwash and cross into my own land.’

'We can, i we are main or Minas Tirith,’ said Araorn, 't that is
not yet areed. And sch a corse may e more erilos than it sonds. The
vale o Entwash is lat and enny, and o is a deadly eril there or those
on oot and laden. I wold not aandon or oats ntil we mst. The River is
at least a ath that cannot e missed.'

'Bt the Enemy holds the eastern an,' oected Boromir. 'And even i
yo ass the Gates o Aronath and come nmolested to the Tindroc, what
will yo do then? Lea down the Falls and land in the marshes? ’

'No! ' answered Araorn. 'Say rather that we will ear or oats y the
ancient way to Raros-oot, and there tae to the water aain. Do yo not
now, Boromir, or do yo choose to oret the North Stair, and the hih seat
on Amon Hen, that were made in the days o the reat ins? I at least
have a mind to stand in that hih lace aain, eore I decide my rther
corse. There, maye, we shall see some sin that will ide s.'

Boromir held ot lon aainst this choice; t when it ecame lain
that Frodo wold ollow Araorn, wherever he went, he ave in. 'It is not
the way o the Men o Minas Tirith to desert their riends at need,' he
said, 'and yo will need my strenth, i ever yo are to reach the Tindroc.

To the tall isle I will o, t no rther. There I shall trn to my home,
alone i my hel has not earned the reward o any comanionshi.’

The day was now rowin, and the o had lited a little. It was
decided that Araorn and Leolas shold at once o orward alon the shore,
while the others remained y the oats. Araorn hoed to ind some way y
which they cold carry oth their oats and their aae to the smoother




water eyond the Raids.

'Boats o the Elves wold not sin, maye,’ he said, 't that does not
say that we shold come throh Sarn Geir alive. None have ever done so
yet. No road was made y the Men o Gondor in this reion, or even in their
reat days their realm did not reach  Andin eyond the Emyn Mil; t
there is a ortae-way somewhere on the western shore, i I can ind it. It
cannot yet have erished; or liht oats sed to orney ot o Wilderland
down to Osiliath, and still did so ntil a ew years ao, when the Ores o
Mordor ean to mltily.’

’Seldom in my lie has any oat come ot o the North, and the Ores
rowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. 'I yo o orward, eril will row
with every mile, even i yo ind a ath.’

'Peril lies ahead on every sothward road,’ answered Araorn. 'Wait or
s one day. I we do not retrn in that time, yo will now that evil has
indeed eallen s. Then yo mst tae a new leader and ollow him as est
yo can.’

It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Araorn and Leolas clim the
stee an and vanish into the mists; t his ears roved rondless. Only
two or three hors had assed, and it was arely mid-day, when the shadowy
shaes o the exlorers aeared aain.

'All is well,’ said Araorn, as he clamered down the an. ’There is a
trac, and it leads to a ood landin that is still serviceale. The
distance is not reat: the head o the Raids is t hal a mile elow s,
and they are little more than a mile lon. Not ar eyond them the stream
ecomes clear and smooth aain, thoh it rns switly. Or hardest tas
will e to et or oats and aae to the old ortae- way. We have ond
it, t it lies well ac rom the water-side here, and rns nder the lee
o a roc-wall, a rlon or more rom the shore. We did not ind where the
northward landin lies. I it still remains, we mst have assed it
yesterday niht. We miht laor ar stream and yet miss it in the o. I
ear we mst leave the River now, and mae or the ortae-way as est we
can rom here.’

'That wold not e easy, even i we were all Men,’ said Boromir.

'Yet sch as we are we will try it,’ said Araorn.

’Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. 'The les o Men will la on a roh road,
while a Dwar oes on, e the rden twice his own weiht, Master Boromir! ’

The tas roved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The oods were




taen ot o the oats and roht to the to o the an, where there was a
level sace. Then the oats were drawn ot o the water and carried . They
were ar less heavy than any had exected. O what tree rowin in the
elvish contry they were made not even Leolas new; t the wood was
toh

and yet stranely liht. Merry and Piin alone cold carry their oat with
ease alon the lat. Nonetheless it needed the strenth o the two Men to
lit and hal them over the rond that the Comany now had to cross. It
sloed  away rom the River, a tmled waste o rey limestone-olders,
with many hidden holes shroded with weeds and shes; there were thicets
o ramles, and sheer dells; and here and there oy ools ed y waters
triclin rom the terraces rther inland.

One y one Boromir and Araorn carried the oats, while the others
toiled and scramled ater them with the aae. At last all was removed
and laid on the ortae-way. Then with little rther hindrance, save rom
srawlin riars and many allen stones, they moved orward all toether.
Fo still hn in veils on the crmlin roc-wall, and to their let mist
shroded the River: they cold hear it rshin and oamin over the shar
shelves and stony teeth o Sarn Geir, t they cold not see it. Twice they
made the orney, eore all was roht sae to the sothern landin.

There the ortae-way, trnin ac to the water-side, ran ently down
to the shallow ede o a little ool. It seemed to have een scooed in the
river-side, not y hand, t y the water swirlin down rom Sarn Geir
aainst a low ier o roc that tted ot some way into the stream. Beyond
it the shore rose sheer into a rey cli, and there was no rther assae
or those on oot.

Already the short aternoon was ast, and a dim clody ds was closin
in. They sat eside the water listenin to the consed rsh and roar o the
Raids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleey, and their hearts were
as loomy as the dyin day.

'Well, here we are, and here we mst ass another niht,' said Boromir.

'We need slee, and even i Araorn had a mind to ass the Gates o Aronath
y niht, we are all too tired-excet, no dot, or strdy dwar.'

Gimli made no rely: he was noddin as he sat.

'Let s rest as mch as we can now,' said Araorn. 'Tomorrow we mst
orney y day aain. Unless the weather chanes once more and cheats s, we
shall have a ood chance o sliin throh, nseen y any eyes on the




eastern shore. Bt toniht two mst watch toether in trns: three hors o
and one on ard.'

Nothin haened that niht worse than a rie drile o rain an hor
eore dawn. As soon as it was lly liht they started. Already the o was
thinnin. They et as close as they cold to the western side, and they
cold see the dim shaes o the low clis risin ever hiher, shadowy walls
with their eet in the hrryin river. In the mid-mornin the clods drew
down lower, and it ean to rain heavily. They drew the sin -covers over
their oats to revent them rom ein looded, and drited on: little cold
e seen eore them or aot them throh the rey allin crtains.

The rain, however, did not last lon. Slowly the sy aove rew
lihter, and then sddenly the clods roe, and their draled rines
trailed away northward  the River. The os and mists were one. Beore
the travellers lay a wide ravine, with reat rocy sides to which cln,
on shelves and in narrow crevices, a ew thrawn trees. The channel rew
narrower and the River switer. Now they were seedin alon with little
hoe o stoin or trnin, whatever they miht meet ahead. Over them was a
lane o ale-le sy, arond them the dar overshadowed River, and eore
them lac, shttin ot the sn, the hills o Emyn Mil, in which no
oenin cold e seen.

Frodo eerin orward saw in the distance two reat rocs aroachin:
lie reat innacles or illars o stone they seemed. Tall and sheer and
ominos they stood on either side o the stream. A narrow a aeared
etween them, and the River swet the oats towards it.

'Behold the Aronath, the Pillars o the Kins! ' cried Araorn. 'We
shall ass them soon. Kee the oats in line, and as ar aart as yo can!

Hold the middle o the stream! ’

As Frodo was orne towards them the reat illars rose lie towers to
meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast rey ires silent t
threatenin. Then he saw that they were indeed shaed and ashioned: the
crat and ower o old had wroht on them, and still they reserved
throh the sns and rains o orotten years the mihty lienesses in which
they had een hewn. Uon reat edestals onded in the dee waters stood
two reat ins o stone: still with lrred eyes and crannied rows they
rowned on the North. The let hand o each was raised alm otwards in
estre o warnin; in each riht hand there was an axe; on each head
there was a crmlin helm and crown. Great ower and maesty they still




wore, the silent wardens o a lon -vanished indom. Awe and ear ell on
Frodo, and he cowered down, shttin his eyes and not darin to loo  as
the oat drew near. Even Boromir owed his head as the oats whirled y.
rail and leetin as little leaves, nder the endrin shadow o the
sentinels o N®menor. So they assed into the dar chasm o the Gates.

Sheer rose the dreadl clis to nessed heihts on either side. Far
o was the dim sy. The lac waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed
over them. Frodo crochin over his nees heard Sam in ront mtterin and
roanin: 'What a lace! What a horrile lace! Jst let me et ot o this
oat, and I'll never wet my toes in a ddle aain, let alone a river! '

'Fear not!' said a strane voice ehind him. Frodo trned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; or the weatherworn Raner was no loner
there. In the stern sat Araorn son o Arathorn, rod and erect, idin
the oat with sill stroes; his hood was cast ac, and his dar hair was
lowin in the wind, a liht was in his eyes: a in retrnin rom exile to
his own land.

’Fear not! ' he said. 'Lon have I desired to loo on the lienesses
o Isildr and Anrion, my sires o old. Under their shadow Elessar, the
Elstone son o Arathorn o the Hose o Valandil Isildr’s son heir o
Elendil, has noht to dread! ’

Then the liht o his eyes aded, and he soe to himsel: 'Wold that
Gandal were here! How my heart yearns or Minas Anor and the walls o my
own city! Bt whither now shall I o? ’

The chasm was lon and dar, and illed with the noise o wind and
rshin water and echoin stone. It ent somewhat towards the west so that
at irst all was dar ahead; t soon Frodo saw a tall a o liht eore
him, ever rowin. Switly it drew near, and sddenly the oats shot
throh, ot into a wide clear liht.

The sn, already lon allen rom the noon, was shinin in a windy sy.

The ent waters sread ot into a lon oval lae, ale Nen Hithoel, enced
y stee rey hills whose sides were clad with trees, t their heads were
are, cold-leamin in the snliht. At the ar sothern end rose three
eas. The midmost stood somewhat orward rom the others and sndered
rom

them, an island in the waters, aot which the lowin River ln ale
shimmerin arms. Distant t dee there came  on the wind a roarin sond
lie the roll o thnder heard ar away.




'Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Araorn, ointin soth to the tall ea.

'Uon the let stands Amon Lhaw, and on the riht is Amon Hen the Hills o
Hearin and o Siht. In the days o the reat ins there were hih seats
on them, and watch was et there. Bt it is said that no oot o man or
east has ever een set on Tol Brandir. Ere the shade o niht alls we
shall come to them. I hear the endless voice o Raros callin.'

The Comany rested now or a while, dritin soth on the crrent that
lowed throh the middle o the lae. They ate some ood, and then they
too to their addles and hastened on their way. The sides o the westward
hills ell into shadow, and the Sn rew rond and red. Here and there a
misty star eered ot. The three eas loomed eore them, darlin in the
twiliht. Raros was roarin with a reat voice. Already niht was laid on
the lowin waters when the travellers came at last nder the shadow o the
hills.

The tenth day o their orney was over. Wilderland was ehind them.
They cold o no rther withot choice etween the east-way and the west.
The last stae o the Qest was eore them.




Chater 10. The Breain o the Fellowshi



Araorn led them to the riht arm o the River. Here on its western
side nder the shadow o Tol Brandir a reen lawn ran down to the water rom
the eet o Amon Hen. Behind it rose the irst entle sloes o the hill
clad with trees, and trees marched away westward alon the crvin shores o
the lae. A little srin ell tmlin down and ed the rass.

'Here we will rest toniht,' said Araorn. 'This is the lawn o Parth
Galen: a air lace in the smmer days o old. Let s hoe that no evil has
yet come here.'

They drew  their oats on the reen ans, and eside them they made
their cam. They set a watch, t had no siht nor sond o their enemies.

I Gollm had contrived to ollow them, he remained nseen and nheard.
Nonetheless as the niht wore on Araorn rew neasy, tossin oten in his
slee and wain. In the small hors he ot  and came to Frodo, whose trn
it was to watch.

'Why are yo wain? ' ased Frodo. 'It is not yor watch.'

'I do not now,’ answered Araorn; 't a shadow and a threat has een
rowin in my slee. It wold e well to draw yor sword.'

'Why? ’ said Frodo. 'Are enemies at hand? ’

'Let s see what Stin may show,' answered Araorn.

Frodo then drew the el-lade rom its sheath. To his dismay the edes
leamed dimly in the niht. 'Ores! ’ he said. 'Not very near, and yet too
near, it seems.’

'I eared as mch,' said Araorn. 'Bt maye they are not on this side
o the River. The liht o Stin is aint, and it may oint to no more than
sies o Mordor roamin on the sloes o Amon Lhaw. I have never heard
eore o Ores on Amon Hen. Yet who nows what may haen in these
evil

days, now that Minas Tirith no loner holds secre the assaes o Andin.
We mst o warily tomorrow.’

The day came lie ire and smoe. Low in the East there were lac ars
o clod lie the mes o a reat rnin. The risin sn lit them rom
eneath with lames o mry red; t soon it climed aove them into a
clear sy. The smmit o Tol Brandir was tied with old. Frodo looed ot




eastward and aed at the tall island. Its sides sran sheer ot o the
rnnin water. Hih  aove the tall clis were stee sloes on which
trees climed, montin one head aove another; and aove them aain were
rey aces o inaccessile roc, crowned y a reat sire o stone. Many
irds were circlin aot it, t no sin o other livin thins cold e
seen.

When they had eaten, Araorn called the Comany toether. 'The day has
come at last,' he said: 'the day o choice which we have lon delayed. What
shall now ecome o or Comany that has travelled so ar in ellowshi?
Shall we trn west with Boromir and o to the wars o Gondor; or trn east
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we rea or ellowshi and o this way and
that as each may choose? Whatever we do mst e done soon. We cannot
lon

halt here. The enemy is on the eastern shore, we now; t I ear that the
Ores may already e on this side o the water.'

There was a lon silence in which no one soe or moved.

'Well, Frodo,' said Araorn at last. 'I ear that the rden is laid
on yo. Yo are the Bearer aointed y the Concil. Yor own way yo
alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise yo. I am not Gandal, and
thoh I have tried to ear his art, I do not now what desin or hoe he
had or this hor, i indeed he had any. Most liely it seems that i he
were here now the choice wold still wait on yo. Sch is yor ate.'

Frodo did not answer at once. Then he soe slowly. 'I now that haste
is needed, yet I cannot choose. The rden is heavy. Give me an hor loner,
and I will sea. Let me e alone! ’

Araorn looed at him with indly ity. 'Very well, Frodo son o
Droo,' he said. 'Yo shall have an hor, and yo shall e alone. We will
stay here or a while. Bt do not stray ar or ot o call.’

Frodo sat or a moment with his head owed. Sam, who had een watchin
his master with reat concern, shoo his head and mttered: 'Plain as a
iesta it is, t it's no ood Sam Gamee ttin in his soe st now.'

Presently Frodo ot  and waled away; and Sam saw that while the
others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes o Boromir
ollowed Frodo intently, ntil he assed ot o siht in the trees at the
oot o Amon Hen.

Wanderin aimlessly at irst in the wood, Frodo ond that his eet




were leadin him  towards the sloes o the hill. He came to a ath, the
dwindlin rins o a road o lon ao. In stee laces stairs o stone had
een hewn, t now they were craced and worn, and slit y the roots o
trees. For some while he climed, not carin which way he went, ntil he
came to a rassy lace. Rowan-trees rew aot it, and in the midst was a
wide lat stone. The little land lawn was oen on the East and was
illed now with the early snliht. Frodo halted and looed ot over the
River, ar elow him, to Tol Brandir and the irds wheelin in the reat
l o air etween him and the ntrodden isle. The voice o Raros was a
mihty roarin minled with a dee throin oom.

He sat down on the stone and ced his chin in his hands, starin
eastwards t seein little with his eyes. All that had haened since Bilo
let the Shire was assin throh his mind, and he recalled and ondered
everythin that he cold rememer o Gandal s words. Time went on, and
still he was no nearer to a choice.

Sddenly he awoe rom his thohts: a strane eelin came to him that
somethin was ehind him, that nriendly eyes were on him. He sran
and trned; t all that he saw to his srrise was Boromir, and his ace
was smilin and ind.

'I was araid or yo, Frodo,' he said, comin orward. 'I Araorn is
riht and Ores are near, then none o s shold wander alone, and yo least
o all: so mch deends on yo. And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now
and tal or a while, since I have ond yo? It wold comort me. Where
there are so many, all seech ecomes a deate withot end. Bt two toether
may erhas ind wisdom.'

'Yo are ind,' answered Frodo. 'Bt I do not thin that any seech
will hel me. For I now what I shold do, t I am araid o doin it,
Boromir: araid.'

Boromir stood silent. Raros roared endlessly on. The wind mrmred in
the ranches o the trees. Frodo shivered.

Sddenly Boromir came and sat eside him. 'Are yo sre that yo do not
ser needlessly? ’ he said. 'I wish to hel yo. Yo need consel in yor
hard choice. Will yo not tae mine? ’

’I thin I now already what consel yo wold ive, Boromir,' said
Frodo. 'And it wold seem lie wisdom t or the warnin o my heart.'

'Warnin? Warnin aainst what? ' said Boromir sharly.

'Aainst delay. Aainst the way that seems easier. Aainst resal o




the rden that is laid on me. Aainst -well, i it mst e said, aainst
trst in the strenth and trth o Men.'

'Yet that strenth has lon rotected yo ar away in yor little
contry, thoh yo new it not.'

'I do not dot the valor o yor eole. Bt the world is chanin.

The walls o Minas Tirith may e stron, t they are not stron enoh. I
they ail, what then? '

'We shall all in attle valiantly. Yet there is still hoe that they
will not ail.'

'No hoe while the Rin lasts,' said Frodo.

'Ah! The Rin! ' said Boromir, his eyes lihtin. 'The Rin! Is it not
a strane ate that we shold ser so mch ear and dot or so small a
thin? So small a thin! And I have seen it only or an instant in the Hose
o Elrond. Cold I not have a siht o it aain? '

Frodo looed . His heart went sddenly cold. He caht the strane
leam in Boromir's eyes, yet his ace was still ind and riendly. 'It is
est that it shold lie hidden,' he answered.

'As yo wish. I care not,' said Boromir. 'Yet may I not even sea o
it? For yo seem ever to thin only o its ower in the hands o the Enemy:
o its evil ses not o its ood. The world is chanin, yo say. Minas
Tirith will all, i the Rin lasts. Bt why? Certainly, i the Rin were
with the Enemy. Bt why, i it were with s? '

'Were yo not at the Concil? ' answered Frodo. 'Becase we cannot se
it, and what is done with it trns to evil.’

Boromir ot  and waled aot imatiently. 'So yo o on,' he cried.
'Gandal, Elrond — all these ol have taht yo to say so. For themselves
they may e riht. These elves and hal-elves and wiards, they wold come
to rie erhas. Yet oten I dot i they are wise and not merely timid.

Bt each to his own ind. Tre-hearted Men, they will not e corrted. We
o Minas Tirith have een stanch throh lon years o trial. We do not
desire the ower o wiard-lords, only strenth to deend orselves,
strenth in a st case. And ehold! in or need chance rins to liht the
-Rin o Power. It is a it, I say; a it to the oes o Mordor. It is mad
not to se it, to se the ower o the Enemy aainst him. The earless, the
rthless, these alone will achieve victory. What cold not a warrior do in
this hor, a reat leader? What cold not Araorn do? Or i he reses, why




not Boromir? The Rin wold ive me ower o Command. How I wold
drive the

hosts o Mordor, and all men wold loc to my anner!'

Boromir strode  and down, seain ever more lodly: Almost he seemed
to have orotten Frodo, while his tal dwelt on walls and weaons, and the
msterin o men; and he drew lans or reat alliances and lorios
victories to e; and he cast down Mordor, and ecame himsel a mihty in,
enevolent and wise. Sddenly he stoed and waved his arms.

'And they tell s to throw it away!' he cried. 'I do not say destroy
it. That miht e well, i reason cold show any hoe o doin so. It does
not. The only lan that is roosed to s is that a hallin shold wal
lindly into Mordor and oer the Enemy every chance o recatrin it or
himsel. Folly!

'Srely yo see it, my riend?' he said, trnin now sddenly to Frodo
aain. 'Yo say that yo are araid. I it is so, the oldest shold ardon
yo. Bt is it not really yor ood sense that revolts?'

'No, I am araid,' said Frodo. 'Simly araid. Bt I am lad to have
heard yo sea so lly. My mind is clearer now.'

'Then yo will come to Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir. His eyes were
shinin and his ace eaer.

'Yo misnderstand me,’ said Frodo.

'Bt yo will come, at least or a while? ' Boromir ersisted. 'My city
is not ar now; and it is little rther rom there to Mordor than rom
here. We have een lon in the wilderness, and yo need news o what the
Enemy is doin eore yo mae a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he said.
'Yo

need rest eore yor ventre, i o yo mst.’ He laid his hand on the
hoit's sholder in riendly ashion; t Frodo elt the hand tremlin
with sressed excitement. He steed icly away, and eyed with alarm the
tall Man, nearly twice his heiht and many times his match in strenth.

'Why are yo so nriendly? ’ said Boromir. 'I am a tre man, neither
thie nor tracer. I need yor Rin: that yo now now; t I ive yo my
word that I do not desire to ee it. Will yo not at least let me mae
trial o my lan? Lend me the Rin! ’

'No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Concil laid it on me to ear it.'

'It is y or own olly that the Enemy will deeat s,’ cried Boromir.

'How it aners me! Fool! Ostinate ool! Rnnin willly to death and




minin or case. I any mortals have claim to the Rin, it is the men o
N®menor, and not Hallins. It is not yors save y nhay chance. It miht
have een mine. It shold e mine. Give it to me ! '

Frodo did not answer, t moved away till the reat lat stone stood
etween them. 'Come, come, my riend! ' said Boromir in a soter voice. 'Why
not et rid o it? Why not e ree o yor dot and ear? Yo can lay the
lame on me, i yo will. Yo can say that I was too stron and too it y
orce. For I am too stron or yo, hallin,' he cried; and sddenly he
sran over the stone and leaed at Frodo. His air and leasant ace was
hideosly chaned; a rain ire was in his eyes.

Frodo doded aside and aain t the stone etween them. There was only
one thin he cold do: tremlin he lled ot the Rin on its chain and
icly slied it on his iner, even as Boromir sran at him aain. The
Man ased, stared or a moment amaed, and then ran wildly aot, seein
here and there amon the rocs and trees.

'Miserale tricster!' he shoted. 'Let me et my hands on yo! Now I
see yor mind. Yo will tae the Rin to Saron and sell s all. Yo have
only waited yor chance to leave s in the lrch. Crse yo and all
hallins to death and darness ! ' Then, catchin his oot on a stone, he
ell srawlin and lay on his ace. For a while he was as still as i his
own crse had strc him down; then sddenly he wet.

He rose and assed his hand over his eyes, dashin away the tears.

'What have I said? ' he cried. 'What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.
'Come ac! A madness too me, t it has assed. Come ac! '

There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was already
ar away, leain lindly  the ath to the hill-to. Terror and rie
shoo him, seein in his thoht the mad ierce ace o Boromir, and his
rnin eyes.

Soon he came ot alone on the smmit o Amon Hen, and halted, asin
or reath. He saw as throh a mist a wide lat circle, aved with mihty
las, and srronded with a crmlin attlement; and in the middle, set
on or carven illars, was a hih seat, reached y a stair o many stes.

U he went and sat on the ancient chair, eelin lie a lost child that
had clamered on the throne o montain -ins.

At irst he cold see little. He seemed to e in a world o mist in
which there were only shadows: the Rin was on him. Then here and there
the mist ave way and he saw many visions: small and clear as i they were




nder his eyes on a tale, and yet remote. There was no sond, only riht
livin imaes. The world seemed to have shrn and allen silent. He was
sittin on the Seat o Seein, on Amon Hen, the Hill o the Eye o the Men
o N®menor. Eastward he looed into wide ncharted lands, nameless lains,
and orests nexlored. Northward he looed, and the Great River lay lie a
rion eneath him, and the Misty Montains stood small and hard as roen
teeth. Westward he looed and saw the road astres o Rohan; and Orthanc,
the innacle o Isenard, lie a lac sie. Sothward he looed, and elow
his very eet the Great River crled lie a tolin wave and lned over
the alls o Raros into a oamin it; a limmerin rainow layed on the
me. And Ethir Andin he saw, the mihty delta o the River, and myriads o
sea-irds whirlin lie a white dst in the sn, and eneath them a reen
and silver sea, rilin in endless lines.

Bt everywhere he looed he saw the sins o war. The Misty Montains
were crawlin lie anthills: ores were issin ot o a thosand holes.

Under the ohs o Mirwood there was deadly strie o Elves and Men and
ell easts. The land o the Beornins was alame; a clod was over Moria;
smoe rose on the orders o Lrien.

Horsemen were alloin on the rass o Rohan; wolves ored rom
Isenard. From the havens o Harad shis o war t ot to sea; and ot o
the East Men were movin endlessly: swordsmen, searmen, owmen on
horses,

chariots o chietains and laden wains. All the ower o the Dar Lord was
in motion. Then trnin soth aain he eheld Minas Tirith. Far away it
seemed, and eatil: white-walled, many -towered, rod and air on its
montain- seat; its attlements littered with steel, and its trrets were
riht with many anners. Hoe leaed in his heart. Bt aainst Minas Tirith
was set another ortress, reater and more stron. Thither, eastward,
nwillin his eye was drawn. It assed the rined rides o Osiliath, the
rinnin ates o Minas Morl. and the hanted Montains, and it looed
on Gororoth, the valley o terror in the Land o Mordor. Darness lay
there nder the Sn. Fire lowed amid the smoe. Mont Doom was rnin,
and

a reat ree risin. Then at last his ae was held: wall on wall,
attlement on attlement, lac, immeasraly stron, montain o iron,
ate o steel, tower o adamant, he saw it: Barad-dyr, Fortress o Saron.

All hoe let him.




And sddenly he elt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dar Tower that
did not slee. He new that it had ecome aware o his ae. A ierce eaer
will was there. It leaed towards him; almost lie a iner he elt it,
searchin or him. Very soon it wold nail him down, now st exactly where
he was. Amon Lhaw it toched. It lanced on Tol Brandir he threw himsel
rom the seat, crochin, coverin his head with his rey hood.

He heard himsel cryin ot: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I come, I
come to yo ? He cold not tell. Then as a lash rom some other oint o
ower there came to his mind another thoht: Tae it o! Tae it o!

Fool, tae it o! Tae o the Rin!

The two owers strove in him. For a moment, erectly alanced etween
their iercin oints, he writhed, tormented. Sddenly he was aware o
himsel aain. Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye: ree to choose, and
with one remainin instant in which to do so. He too the Rin o his
iner. He was neelin in clear snliht eore the hih seat. A lac
shadow seemed to ass lie an arm aove him; it missed Amon Hen and
roed

ot west, and aded. Then all the sy was clean and le and irds san in
every tree.

Frodo rose to his eet. A reat weariness was on him, t his will was
irm and his heart lihter. He soe alod to himsel. T will do now what I
mst,' he said. This at least is lain: the evil o the Rin is already at
wor even in the Comany, and the Rin mst leave them eore it does more
harm. I will o alone. Some I cannot trst, and those I can trst are too
dear to me: oor old Sam, and Merry and Piin. Strider, too: his heart
yearns or Minas Tirith, and he will e needed there, now Boromir has allen
into evil. I will o alone. At once.'

He went icly down the ath and came ac to the lawn where Boromir
had ond him. Then he halted, listenin. He thoht he cold hear cries and
calls rom the woods near the shore elow.

'They'll e hntin or me,' he said. T wonder how lon I have een
away. Hors, I shold thin.' He hesitated. 'What can I do? ' he mttered.

'I mst o now or I shall never o. I shan't et a chance aain. I hate
leavin them, and lie this withot any exlanation. Bt srely they will
nderstand. Sam will. And what else can I do?'

Slowly he drew ot the Rin and t it on once more. He vanished and
assed down the hill, less than a rstle o the wind.




The others remained lon y the river -side. For some time they had een
silent, movin restlessly aot; t now they were sittin in a circle, and
they were talin. Every now and aain they made eorts to sea o other
thins, o their lon road and many adventres; they estioned Araorn
concernin the realm o Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnants o
its reat wors that cold still e seen in this strane order -land o the
Emyn Mil: the stone ins and the seats o Lhaw and Hen, and the reat
Stair eside the alls o Raros. Bt always their thohts and words
strayed ac to Frodo and the Rin. What wold Frodo choose to do? Why
was

he hesitatin?

'He is deatin which corse is the most deserate, I thin,’ said
Araorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hoeless than ever or the Comany
to o east, since we have een traced y Gollm, and mst ear that the
secret o or orney is already etrayed. Bt Minas Tirith is no nearer to
the Fire and the destrction o the Brden.

'We may remain there or a while and mae a rave stand; t the Lord
Denethor and all his men cannot hoe to do what even Elrond said was eyond
his ower: either to ee the Brden secret, or to hold o the ll miht
o the Enemy when he comes to tae it. Which way wold any o s choose in
Frodo’s lace? I do not now. Now indeed we miss Gandal most.’

’Grievos is or loss,’ said Leolas. ’Yet we mst needs mae  or
minds withot his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so hel Frodo? Let s call
him ac and then vote! I shold vote or Minas Tirith.’

'And so shold I,’ said Gimli. ’We, o corse, were only sent to hel
the Bearer alon the road, to o no rther than we wished; and none o s
is nder any oath or command to see Mont Doom. Hard was my artin
rom

Lothlrien. Yet I have come so ar, and I say this: now we have reached the
last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I wold choose
Minas Tirith, t i he does not, then I ollow him.’

'And I too will o with him,’ said Leolas. 'It wold e aithless now
to say arewell.’

’It wold indeed e a etrayal, i we all let him,’ said Araorn. ’Bt
i he oes east, then all need not o with him; nor do I thin that all
shold. That ventre is deserate: as mch so or eiht as or three or two,
or one alone. I yo wold let me choose, then I shold aoint three




comanions: Sam, who cold not ear it otherwise; and Gimli; and mysel.
Boromir will retrn to his own city, where his ather and his eole need
him; and with him the others shold o, or at least Meriadoc and Pererin,
i Leolas is not willin to leave s.'

'That won’t do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Piin and
I always intended to o wherever he went, and we still do. Bt we did not
realie what that wold mean. It seemed dierent so ar away, in the Shire
or in Ri vendell. It wold e mad and crel to let Frodo o to Mordor. Why
can't we sto him?'

'We mst sto him,' said Piin. 'And that is what he is worryin
aot, I am sre. He nows we shan't aree to his oin east. And he doesn't
lie to as anyone to o with him, oor old ellow. Imaine it: oin o to
Mordor alone! ' Piin shddered. 'Bt the dear silly old hoit, he oht
to now that he hasn't ot to as. He oht to now that i we can't sto
him, we shan't leave him.'

'Bein yor ardon,' said Sam. 'I don't thin yo nderstand my
master at all. He isn't hesitatin aot which way to o. O corse not!
What's the ood o Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, ein yor
ardon,

Master Boromir,' he added, and trned. It was then that they discovered that
Boromir, who at irst had een sittin silent on the otside o the circle,
was no loner there.

'Now where's he ot to? ' cried Sam, looin worried. 'He's een a it
eer lately, to my mind. Bt anyway he's not in this siness. He's o to
his home, as he always said; and no lame to him. Bt Mr. Frodo, he nows
he's ot to ind the Cracs o Doom, i he can. Bt he's araid. Now it's
come to the oint, he's st lain terriied. That's what his trole is. O
corse he's had a it o schoolin, so to sea-we all have-since we let
home, or he'd e so terriied he'd st lin the Rin in the River and
olt. Bt he's still too rihtened to start. And he isn't worryin aot s
either: whether we'll o alon with him or no. He nows we mean to. That's
another thin that's otherin him. I he screws himsel  to o, he'll
want to o alone. Mar my words! We're oin to have trole when he
comes

ac. For he'll screw himsel  all riht, as sre as his name's Bains.'

'I elieve yo sea more wisely than any o s, Sam,' said Araorn.
'And what shall we do, i yo rove riht? ’




'Sto him! Don't let him o! ' cried Piin.

'I wonder? ' said Araorn. 'He is the Bearer, and the ate o the
Brden is on him. I do not thin that it is or art to drive him one way or
the other. Nor do I thin that we shold scceed, i we tried. There are
other owers at wor ar stroner.'

'Well, I wish Frodo wold "screw himsel " and come ac, and let s
et it over,' said Piin. 'This waitin is horrile! Srely the time is ?



'Yes,' said Araorn. 'The hor is lon assed. The mornin is wearin
away. We mst call or him.'

At that moment Boromir reaeared. He came ot rom the trees and
waled towards them withot seain. His ace looed rim and sad. He
ased as i contin those that were resent, and then sat down aloo, with
his eyes on the rond.

'Where have yo een, Boromir? ’ ased Araorn. 'Have yo seen Frodo? ’

Boromir hesitated or a second. 'Yes, and no,’ he answered slowly.

'Yes: I ond him some way  the hill, and I soe to him. I red him to
come to Minas Tirith and not to o east. I rew anry and he let me. He
vanished. I have never seen sch a thin haen eore, thoh I have heard
o it in tales. He mst have t the Rin on. I cold not ind him aain. I
thoht he wold retrn to yo.'

'Is that all that yo have to say? ' said Araorn, looin hard and not
too indly at Boromir.

'Yes,' he answered. 'I will say no more yet.’

'This is ad!' cried Sam, min . 'I don't now what this Man has
een  to. Why shold Mr. Frodo t the thin on? He didn't oht to have;
and i he has, oodness nows what may have haened!'

'Bt he woldn't ee it on' 1 said Merry. 'Not when he had escaed the
nwelcome visitor, lie Bilo sed to.'

'Bt where did he o? Where is he? ' cried Piin. 'He's een away aes
now.'

'How lon is it since yo saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' ased Araorn.

'Hal an hor, maye,' he answered. 'Or it miht e an hor. I have
wandered or some time since. I do not now! I do not now! ' He t his
head in his hands, and sat as i owed with rie.

'An hor since he vanished! ' shoted Sam. 'We mst try and ind him at
once. Come on! ’




'Wait a moment! ' cried Araorn. 'We mst divide  into airs, and
arrane-here, hold on! Wait! '

It was no ood. They too no notice o him. Sam had dashed o irst.
Merry and Piin had ollowed, and were already disaearin westward into
the trees y the shore, shotin: Frodo! Frodo ! in their clear, hih
hoit- voices. Leolas and Gimli were rnnin. A sdden anic or madness
seemed to have allen on the Comany.

'We shall all e scattered and lost,’ roaned Araorn. 'Boromir! I do
not now what art yo have layed in this mischie, t hel now! Go ater
those two yon hoits, and ard them at the least, even i yo cannot
ind Frodo. Come ac to this sot, i yo ind him, or any traces o him. I
shall retrn soon.'

Araorn sran switly away and went in rsit o Sam. Jst as he
reached the little lawn amon the rowans he overtoo him, toilin hill,
antin and callin, Frodo!

'Come with me, Sam! ’ he said. 'None o s shold e alone. There is
mischie aot. I eel it. I am oin to the to, to the Seat o Amon Hen,
to see what may e seen. And loo! It is as my heart essed, Frodo went
this way. Follow me, and ee yor eyes oen! ' He sed  the ath.

Sam did his est, t he cold not ee  with Strider the Raner, and
soon ell ehind. He had not one ar eore Araorn was ot o siht ahead.
Sam stoed and ed. Sddenly he claed his hand to his head.

'Whoa, Sam Gamee! ’ he said alod. 'Yor les are too short, so se
yor head! Let me see now! Boromir isn't lyin, that's not his way; t he
hasn't told s everythin. Somethin scared Mr. Frodo adly. He screwed
himsel  to the oint, sdden. He made  his mind at last to o. Where
to? O East. Not withot Sam? Yes, withot even his Sam. That's hard, crel
hard.'

Sam assed his hand over his eyes, rshin away the tears. 'Steady,
Gamee! ' he said. 'Thin, i yo can! He can't ly across rivers, and he
can't m wateralls. He's ot no ear. So he's ot to et ac to the
oats. Bac to the oats! Bac to the oats, Sam, lie lihtnin! '

Sam trned and olted ac down the ath. He ell and ct his nees. U
he ot and ran on. He came to the ede o the lawn o Parth Galen y the
shore, where the oats were drawn  ot o the water. No one was there.
There seemed to e cries in the woods ehind, t he did not heed them. He
stood ain or a moment, stoc-still, ain. A oat was slidin down the




an all y itsel. With a shot Sam raced across the rass. The oat
slied into the wat



128d



er.

'Comin, Mr. Frodo! Comin! ' called Sam, and ln himsel rom the
an, cltchin at the deartin oat. He missed it y a yard. With a cry
and a slash he ell ace downward into dee swit water. Grlin he went
nder, and the River closed over his crly head.

An exclamation o dismay came rom the emty oat. A addle swirled and
the oat t aot. Frodo was st in time to ras Sam y the hair as he
came , lin and strlin. Fear was starin in his rond rown eyes.

'U yo come, Sam my lad! ’ said Frodo. 'Now tae my hand! '

'Save me, Mr. Frodo! ’ ased Sam. 'I'm drownded. I can’t see yor
hand.’

'Here it is. Don't inch, lad! I won’t let yo o. Tread water and
don’t londer, or yo'll set the oat. There now, et hold o the side,
and let me se the addle! '

With a ew stroes Frodo roht the oat ac to the an, and Sam was
ale to scramle ot, wet as a water-rat. Frodo too o the Rin and
steed ashore aain.

'O all the cononded nisances yo are the worst, Sam! ’ he said.

’Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard! ’ said Sam shiverin. 'That’s hard, tryin
to o withot me and all. I I hadn’t a essed riht, where wold yo e
now? ’

'Saely on my way.’

'Saely! ’ said Sam. 'All alone and withot me to hel yo? I coldn’t
have a orne it, it’d have een the death o me.’

’It wold e the death o yo to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo and I
cold not have orne that.’

'Not as certain as ein let ehind,’ said Sam.

'Bt I am oin to Mordor.’

'I now that well enoh, Mr. Frodo. O corse yo are. And I’m comin
with yo.’

'Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, 'don’t hinder me! The others will e comin
ac at any minte. I they catch me here. I shall have to are and




exlain, and I shall never have the heart or the chance to et o. Bt I
mst o at once. It's the only way.’

'O corse it is,' answered Sam. 'Bt not alone. I'm comin too, or
neither o s isn’t oin. I'll noc holes in all the oats irst.'

Frodo actally lahed. A sdden warmth and ladness toched his heart.
'Leave one! 'he said. 'We'll need it. Bt yo can't come lie this withot
yor ear or ood or anythin.'

'Jst hold on a moment, and I'll et my st!' cried Sam eaerly.

'It's all ready. I thoht we shold e o today.' He rshed to the camin
lace, ished ot his ac rom the ile where Frodo had laid it when he
emtied the oat o his comanions' oods raed a sare lanet, and some
extra acaes o ood, and ran ac.

'So all my lan is soilt! ’ said Frodo. 'It is no ood tryin to
escae yo. Bt I’m lad, Sam. I cannot tell yo how lad. Come alon! It is
lain that we were meant to o toether. We will o, and may the others ind
a sae road! Strider will loo ater them. I don't sose we shall see them
aain.'

'Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam.

So Frodo and Sam set o on the last stae o the Qest toether. Frodo
addled away rom the shore, and the River ore them switly away, down the
western arm, and ast the rownin clis o Tol Brandir. The roar o the
reat alls drew nearer. Even with sch hel as Sam cold ive, it was hard
wor to ass across the crrent at the sothward end o the island and drive
the oat eastward towards the ar shore.

At lenth they came to land aain on the sothern sloes o Amon
Lhaw. There they ond a shelvin shore, and they drew the oat ot, hih
aove the water, and hid it as well as they cold ehind a reat older.

Then sholderin their rdens, they set o, seein a ath that wold
rin them over the rey hills o the Emyn Mil, and down into the Land o
Shadow.




Here ends the irst art o the history o the War o the Rin.

The second art is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events reconted
in it are dominated y ORTHANC, the citadel o Sarman, and the ortress
o/MINAS MORGUL that ards the secret entrance to Mordor; it tells o
the deeds and erils o all the memers o the now sndered ellowshi, ntil
the comin o the Great Darness.

The third art tells o the last deence aainst the Shadow, and the
end o the mission o the Rin-earer in THE RETURN OF THE KING.
